Capital Gain - Section 45 provides that any profits or gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset effected in the previous year will be chargeable to income-tax under the head ‘Capital Gains’. Such capital gains will be deemed to be the income of the previous year in which the transfer took place. In this charging section, two terms are important. One is “capital asset” and the other is “transfer”. Hence, in this chapter on capital gains, we begin our discussion with the definition of “capital asset” and “transfer”. Thereafter, we will proceed to discuss the various circumstances under which capital gains tax is levied. There are certain transactions which are not to be regarded as transfer for the purposes of capital gains. These transactions have also been discussed in this chapter. For computing long-term capital gains, application of cost inflation index is necessary. Again, there is a separate method of computation of capital gains in respect of depreciable assets. Also, there are exemptions in cases where capital gains/net sales consideration are invested in specified assets. All these aspects are being discussed in this chapter.

What is capital asset? - According to section 2(14), a capital asset means –
(a)property of any kind held by an assessee, whether or not connected with his business or profession;
(b)any securities held by a Foreign Institutional Investor which has invested in such securities in accordance with the SEBI regulations.
(c)any unit linked insurance policy (ULIP) issued on or after 1.2.2021, to which exemption under section 10(10D) does not apply on account of applicability of the fourth and fifth provisos thereof.
A ULIP which is issued on or after 1.2.2021 whose premium payable exceeds Rs 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during the term of such policy would be a capital asset [Forth proviso to section 10(10D)].In a case where premium is payable by a person for more than one ULIP issued on or after 1.2.2021 and the aggregate of premium payable on such ULIPs exceed Rs 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during the term of any such ULIP(s), the exemption under section 10(10D) would be available in respect of any of those ULIPs (at the option of the assessee) whose aggregate premium payable does not exceed Rs 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during their term. All other ULIPs would be capital assets [Fifth proviso to section 10(10D)].

However, it does not include—
(i)Stock-in trade: Any stock-in-trade [other than securities referred to in (b) above], consumable stores or raw materials held for the purpose of the business or profession of the assessee;
Whether a particular asset is stock-in-trade or capital asset does not depend upon the nature of the item, but the manner in which the same is held. The item would be stock-in- trade in the hands of the assessee who deals or trades in that item; however, the same item would be capital asset for the assessee who holds it as an investment.
Example: A dealer in real estate holds a piece of land as stock-in-trade. But the same will be capital asset for an assessee who holds it as an investment.
The exclusion of stock-in-trade from the definition of capital asset is only in respect of sub- clause (a) above and not sub-clause (b). This implies that even if the nature of such security in the hands of the Foreign Portfolio Investor is stock in trade, the same would be treated as a capital asset and the profit on transfer would be taxable as capital gains. Further, the Explanatory Memorandum to the Finance (No.2) Bill, 2014 clarifies that the income arising from transfer of such security by a Foreign Portfolio Investor (FPI) would be in the nature of capital gain, irrespective of the presence or otherwise in India, of the Fund manager managing the investments of the assessee.
(ii)Personal effects: Personal effects, that is to say, movable property (including wearing apparel and furniture) held for personal use by the assessee or any member of his family dependent on him.
EXCLUSIONS:
(a)jewellery;
(b)archaeological collections;
(c)drawings;
(d)paintings;
(e)sculptures; or
(f)any work of art.
Definition of Jewellery	-Jewellery is a	capital	asset and the profits or gains arising from the transfer of jewellery held for personal use are under the head “capital gains”. For this purpose, the expression ‘jewellery’ includes the following:
-Ornaments made of gold, silver, platinum or any other precious metal or any alloy containing one or more of such precious metals, whether or not containing any precious or semi-precious stones and whether or not worked or sewn into any wearing apparel;
-Precious or semi-precious stones, whether or not set in any furniture, utensil or other article or worked or sewn into any wearing apparel.

(iii)Rural agricultural land in India i.e., agricultural land in India which is not situated in any specified area.
As per the definition that only rural agricultural lands in India are excluded from the purview of the term ‘capital asset’. Hence urban agricultural lands constitute capital assets. Accordingly, the agricultural land described in (a) and (b) below, being land situated within the specified urban limits, would fall within the definition of “capital asset”, and transfer of such land would attract capital gains tax -
(a)agricultural land situated in any area within the jurisdiction of a municipality or cantonment board having population of not less than ten thousand, or
(b)agricultural land situated in any area within such distance, measured aerially, in relation to the range of population as shown hereunder -
- Shortest aerial distance from the local limits of a municipality or cantonment board upto 2 kms and Population according to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published before the first day of the previous year is greater than 10,000.
- Shortest aerial distance from the local limits of a municipality or cantonment board is more than 2 kms but upto 6 kms and Population according to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published before the first day of the previous year is greater than 1,00,000.
-Shortest aerial distance from the local limits of a municipality or cantonment board is more than 6 kms but upto 8 kms and Population according to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published before the first day of the previous year is greater than 10,00,000.

Explanation regarding gains arising on the transfer of urban agricultural land - Explanation 1 to section 2(1A) clarifies that capital gains arising from transfer of any agricultural land situated in any non-rural area (as explained above) will not constitute agricultural revenue within the meaning of section 2(1A). In other words, the capital gains arising from the transfer of such urban agricultural lands would not be treated as agricultural income for the purpose of exemption under section 10(1). Hence, such gains would be exigible to tax under section 45.

(iv)Specified Gold Bonds: 6½% Gold Bonds, 1977, or 7% Gold Bonds, 1980, or National Defence Gold Bonds, 1980, issued by the Central Government;
(v)Special Bearer Bonds, 1991 issued by the Central Government;
(vi)Gold Deposit Bonds issued under the Gold Deposit Scheme, 1999 or deposit certificates issued under the Gold Monetisation Scheme, 2015 and Gold Monetisation Scheme, 2018 notified by the Central Government.
Note- ‘Property’ includes and shall be deemed to have always included any rights in or in relation to an Indian company, including rights of management or control or any other rights whatsoever.


Short-term and long-term assets - As per section 2(42A), short-term capital asset means a capital asset held by an assessee for not more than 36 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer.
As per section 2(29A), long-term capital asset means a capital asset which is not a short- term capital asset. Thus, a capital asset held by an assessee for more than 36 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer is a long-term capital asset.
Exception - A security (other than a unit) listed in a recognized stock exchange, or a unit of an equity oriented fund or a unit of the Unit Trust of India or a Zero Coupon Bond will, however, be considered as a long-term capital asset if the same is held for more than 12 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer. Further, a share of a company (not being a share listed in a recognized stock exchange in India) or an immovable property, being land or building or both would be treated as a short - term capital asset if it was held by an assessee for not more than 24 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer. Thus, the period of holding of unlisted shares or an immovable property, being land or building or both, for being treated as a long-term capital asset would be “more than 24 months” instead of “more than 36 months”. However, capital gains arising from transfer of units of a specified mutual fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023 and market linked debentures would always be deemed as arising from transfer of short term capital assets irrespective of the period of holding of such assets. This is provided in section 50AA.
To summarise, Security (other than unit) listed in a recognized stock exchange,Unit of equity oriented fund/ unit of UTI,Zero Coupon bond is Short-term capital assets, if held for  less than or equal to 12 months and if held for more than 12 months, it will be long-term capital assets.
Unlisted shares, Land or building or both is Short-term capital assets, if held for  less than or equal to 24 months and if held for more than 24 months, it will be long-term capital assets.
Unlisted securities other than shares, Other capital assets is Short-term capital assets, if held for  less than or equal to 36 months and if held for more than 36 months, it will be long-term capital assets.

Note – Capital gains arising from transfer of units of a specified mutual fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023 and market linked debentures would always be deemed as arising from transfer of short term capital assets irrespective of the period of holding of such assets. This is provided in section 50AA

Applicability of tax on capital gains in the hands of the unit holders where the term of the units of Mutual Funds under the Fixed Maturity Plans has been extended [Circular No. 6/2015, dated 09-04-2015] - Fixed Maturity Plans (FMPs) are closed ended funds having a fixed maturity date wherein the duration of investment is decided upfront. Prior to amendment by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2014, units of a mutual fund under the FMPs held for a period of more than twelve months qualified as long-term capital asset. The amendment in sub-section (42A) of section 2 by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2014 required the period of holding in case of units of a mutual fund [other than an equity oriented fund] to be more than thirty-six months to qualify as long term capital asset. As a result, gains arising out of any investment in the units of FMPs made earlier and sold/ redeemed after 10.07.2014 would be taxed as short-term capital gains if the unit was held for a period of thirty-six months or less. To enable the FMPs to qualify as a long-term capital asset, some Asset Management Companies (AMCs) administering mutual funds have offered extension of the duration of the FMPs to a date beyond thirty -six months from the date of the original investment by providing to the investor an option of roll -over of FMPs in accordance with the provisions of Regulation 33(4) of the SEBI (Mutual Funds) Regulation, 1996. The CBDT has, vide this Circular, clarified that the roll over in accordance with the aforesaid regulation will not amount to transfer as the scheme remains the same. Accordingly, no capital gains will arise at the time of exercise of the option by the investor to continue in the same scheme. The capital gains will, however, arise at the time of redemption of the units or opting out of the scheme, as the case may be.




meaning of certain terms:

Equity oriented fund [Clause(a) of Explanation to section 112A] - A fund set up under a scheme of a mutual fund specified under section 10(23D) or under a scheme of an insurance company comprising ULIPs issued on or after 1.2.2021, to which exemption under section 10(10D) does not apply on account of applicability of the fourth and fifth provisos thereof and
(i)in a case where the fund invested in the units of another fund which is traded on a recognised stock exchange –
-a minimum of 90% of the total proceeds of such fund is invested in the units of such other fund; and
-such other fund also invests a minimum of 90% of its total proceeds in the equity shares of domestic companies listed on a recognised stock exchange; and
(ii)in any other case, a minimum of 65% of the total proceeds of such fund is invested in the equity shares of domestic companies listed on a recognised stock exchange.
However, the percentage of equity shareholding or unit held in respect of the fund, as the case may be, shall be computed with reference to the annual average of the monthly averages of the opening and closing figures. In case of a scheme of an insurance company comprising ULIPs issued on or after 1.2.2021, to which exemption u/s 10(10D) does not apply on account of applicability of the fourth and fifth provisos thereof, the minimum requirement of 90% or 65%, as the case may be, mentioned in (i) and (ii) above, is required to be satisfied throughout the term of such insurance policy.

Zero Coupon Bond [Section 2(48)] - a bond issued by any infrastructure capital company or infrastructure capital fund or infrastructure debt fund notified by the Central Government under section 10(47) or a public sector company or a scheduled bank on or after 1st June, 2005, in respect of which no payment and benefit is received or receivable before maturity or redemption from such issuing entity and which the Central Government may notify in this behalf.
Note- The income from transfer of a Zero coupon bond (not being held as stock-in-trade) is to be treated as capital gains. Section 2(47)(iva) provides that maturity or redemption of a Zero coupon bond shall be treated as a transfer for the purposes of capital gains tax.


Determination of period of holding [Clause (i) of Explanation 1 to section 2(42A)]:
1)Where	shares	held company in liquidation - Period to be reckoned/included/excluded is The period subsequent to the date liquidation of company shall be excluded.
2)Where asset becomes the property of an assessee by virtue of section 49(1) - The period for which the capital asset was held by the previous owner shall be included.
3)Where inventory of business is converted into or treated as a capital asset by the assessee - Period from the date of conversion treatment as a capital asset shall considered.
4)Where share(s) in the Indian company	(amalgamated company), becomes the property of an assessee in lieu of share(s) held by him in the amalgamating company at the time of transfer referred under section 47(vii). - The period for which the share(s) was held by the assessee in the amalgamating company shall be included.
5)Where the share or any other security is subscribed by the assessee on the basis of right to subscribe to any share or security or by the person in whose favour such right is renounced by the assessee- Period from the date of allotment of such share or security shall be reckoned.
6)Where the right to subscribe to any share or security, which is renounced in favour of any other person - Period from the date of offer of such right by the company or institution shall be reckoned.
7)Where any financial asset is allotted without any payment and on the basis of holding of any other financial asset-Period from the date of allotment of such financial asset shall be reckoned.
8)Where share(s) in the Indian company being a resulting company becomes the property of an assessee in consideration of demerger - The period for which the share(s) were held by the assessee in demerged company shall be included.
9)Where trading or clearing rights of a recognised stock exchange in India is acquired by a person pursuant to demutualisation or corporation of a recognised stock exchange in India as referred to in section 47(xiii) - The period for which the person was a member of the recognised stock exchange immediately prior to such demutualisation or corporatisation shall be included.
10)Where equity share(s) in a company allotted pursuant to demutualisation or corporation of a recognised stock exchange in India as referred to in section 47(xiii) -The period for which the person was a member of the recognised stock exchange immediately prior to such demutualisation or corporatisation shall be included.
11)Where unit of a business trust, allotted pursuant to transfer of share(s) as referred to in section 47(xvii) - The holding period for which the share(s) held by the assessee shall be included.
12)Where unit(s) becomes the property of the assessee in consideration of transfer of unit(s) in the consolidated scheme of the mutual fund referred to in section 47(xviii) - The period for which the unit(s) in the consolidating scheme of the mutual fund were held by the assessee shall be included.
13)Where share(s) of a company is acquired by the non-resident assessee on redemption of Global Depository Receipts referred to in section 115AC(1)(b) held by such assessee - Period from the date on which a request for such redemption was made shall be reckoned.
14)Where equity share in a company becomes the property of  the  assessee  by  way  of conversion of preference shares into equity shares referred under section 47(xb) - The period for which the preference shares were held by the assessee shall be included.
15)Where unit(s) becomes the property of the assessee in consideration of transfer of unit(s) in the consolidated plan of a mutual fund scheme as referred to in section 47(xix) - The period for which the unit(s) in the consolidating plan of a mutual fund scheme was held by the assessee shall be included.
16)In case of a unit or units in a segregated portfolio referred under section 49(2AG) - Period for which the original unit or units in the main portfolio were held by the assessee shall also be reckoned.
17)Electronic Gold Receipt [EGR] issued by a Vault Manager in respect of gold deposited as referred to in section 47(viid) [Conversion of gold into EGR not regarded as transfer by virtue of section 47(viid)] - The period for which such gold was held by the assessee prior to conversion into the Electronic Gold Receipt
18)Gold released in respect of an Electronic Gold Receipt as referred to in section 47(viid) [Conversion of EGR into Gold not regarded as transfer by virtue of section 47(viid)] - The period for which such Electronic Gold Receipt was held by the assessee prior to its conversion into gold.
19)Where any specified security or sweat equity shares allotted or transferred, directly or indirectly, by the employer free of cost or at concessional rate to his employees (including former employees) - Period from the date of allotment or transfer of such specified security or sweat equity shares shall be reckoned.

“Specified security” means the securities as defined in section 2(h) of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 and, where employees’ stock option has been granted under any plan or scheme therefor, includes the securities offered under such plan or scheme.
“Sweat equity shares” means equity shares issued by a company to its employees or directors at a discount or for consideration other than cash for providing know-how or making available rights in the nature of intellectual property rights or value additions, by whatever name called.


Period of holding in respect of other capital assets [Clause (ii) of Explanation 1 to section 2(42A)] - The period for which any capital asset is held by the assessee shall be determined in accordance with any rules made by the CBDT in this behalf.
Accordingly, the CBDT has inserted Rule 8AA in the Income-tax Rules, 1962 to provide for method of determination of period of holding of capital assets, other than the capital assets mentioned in clause (i) of Explanation 1 to section 2(42A).
-In the case of a capital asset, being a share or debenture of a company, which becomes the property of the assessee in the circumstances mentioned in section 47(x), there shall be included the period for which the bond, debenture, debenture- stock or deposit certificate, as the case may be, was held by the assessee prior to the conversion.
Note: Section 47(x) provides that any transfer by way of conversion of bonds or debentures, debenture-stock or deposit certificates in any form, of a company into shares or debentures of that company shall not be regarded as transfer for the purposes of levy of capital gains tax.
-In case of a capital asset which became the property of the Indian subsidiary company in consequence to conversion of a branch of a foreign company referred to in section 115JG(1), the period for which the asset was held by the said branch of the foreign company and by the previous owner, if any, who has acquired the capital asset by a mode of acquisition referred to in clause (i)/(ii)/(iii)/(iv) of section 49(1) or section 115JG(1) shall be included. 
-In case of the amount which is chargeable to tax as income of specified entity under section 45(4) under the head - "Capital gains", the amount or a part of it shall be deemed to be from transfer of short-term capital asset or long term capital asset,
-Deemed capital gains from transfer of a short term capital asset and the Type of capital asset of specified entity which is short term capital asset at the time of taxation of amount under section 45(4); or capital asset forming part of block of asset; or capital asset being self-generated asset and self-generated goodwill as defined in section 45(4).
-Deemed capital gains from transfer of a long term capital asset(s) and Capital asset which is not covered above(short term capital asset at the time of taxation of amount under section 45(4); or capital asset forming part of block of asset; or capital asset being self-generated asset and self-generated goodwill as defined in section 45(4)) and is long term capital asset at the time of taxation of amount under section 45(4).


Transfer: WHAT IT MEANS? [SECTION 2(47)]
The Act contains an inclusive definition of the term ‘transfer’. Accordingly, transfer in relation to a capital asset includes the following types of transactions:—
(i)the sale, exchange or relinquishment of the asset; or
(ii)the extinguishment of any rights therein; or
(iii)the compulsory acquisition thereof under any law;(Example: Acquisition of industrial undertaking under the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951,or
(iv)the owner of a capital asset may convert/treated the same into/as the stock-in-trade of a business carried on by him. Such conversion/treatment is treated as transfer(example-Where an investor in shares starts a business of dealing in shares and treats existing investments as stock-in-trade of the newly set up business, such conversion shall be regarded as transfer for the purpose of capital gains.); or
(v)the maturity or redemption of a zero coupon bond; or
(vi)possession of an immovable property in consideration of part-performance of a contract referred to in section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.(A enters into an agreement for the sale of his house. The purchaser gives the entire sale consideration to A. A hands over complete rights of possession to the purchaser since he has received the entire sale consideration though house is not yet registered in the name of the buyer. Under the Income-tax Act, the above transaction is considered as transfer.)
(vii)transactions which have the effect of transferring or enabling the enjoyment of an immovable property.
Example- A person may become a member of a co-operative society, company or other association of persons which may be building houses/ flats. When he pays an agreed amount, the society etc. hands over possession of the house to the person concerned. No conveyance deed is registered. For the purpose of income-tax, the above transaction is a transfer.

Note- Section 2(47) provides an inclusive definition of “transfer”, in relation to a capital asset. Explanation 2 to section 2(47) clarifies that ‘transfer’ includes and shall be deemed to have always included –
-disposing of or parting with an asset or any interest therein directly or indirectly, absolutely or conditionally, voluntarily or involuntarily, or
-creating any interest in any asset in any manner whatsoever 
by way of an agreement (whether entered into in India or outside India) or otherwise.The above transactions would be deemed as a transfer notwithstanding that such transfer of rights has been characterised as being effected or dependent upon or flowing from the transfer of a share or shares of a company registered or incorporated outside India.

Section 45 - SCOPE AND YEAR OF CHARGEABILITY

(1)General Provision [Section 45(1)] - 
Any profits or gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset effected in the previous year (other than exemptions covered under this chapter) shall be chargeable to income-tax under this head in the previous year in which the transfer took place.
Year of chargeability - Capital gains are chargeable as the income of the previous year in which the sale or transfer takes place. In other words, for determining the year of chargeability, the relevant date of transfer is not the date of the agreement to sell, but the actual date of sale i.e., the date on which the effect of transfer of title to the property as contemplated by the parties has taken place [Alapati Venkataramiah v. CIT [1965] 57 ITR 185 (SC)]. However, as already noted, Income-tax Act has recognised certain transactions as transfer in spite of the fact that conveyance deed might not have been executed and registered. 

(2)Insurance receipts [Section 45(1A)] - 
Where any person receives any money or other assets under any insurance from an insurer on account of damage to or destruction of any capital asset, as a result of -
•flood, typhoon, hurricane, cyclone, earthquake or other convulsion of nature; or
•riot or civil disturbance; or
•accidental fire or explosion; or
•action by an enemy or action taken in combating an enemy (whether with or without declaration of war), then,
any profits or gains arising from receipt of such money or other assets shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head “Capital gains” and shall be deemed to be the income of the such person for the previous year in which such money or other asset was received.
Full value of consideration: In order to compute capital gains, the value of any money or the fair market value of other assets on the date of such receipt shall be deemed to be the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of such capital assets.

(3)Unit Linked Insurance Policy Receipts [Section 45(1B)]-
Where any person receives, at any time during any previous year, any amount, including the amount allocated by way of bonus, on such policy under a unit linked insurance policy (ULIP) issued on or after 1.2.2021, to which exemption under section 10(10D) does not apply on account of the applicability of the fourth and fifth provisos thereof, then, any profits or gains arising from receipt of such amount by such person shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head "Capital gains" and shall be deemed to be the income of such person of the previous year in which such amount was received.
Any ULIP which is issued on or after 1.2.2021 whose premium payable exceeds ` 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during the term of such policy would be a capital asset [Forth proviso to section 10(10D)].
In a case where premium is payable by a person for more than one ULIP issued on or after 1.2.2021 and the aggregate of premium payable on such ULIPs exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during the term of any such ULIP(s), the exemption under section 10(10D)1 would be available in respect of any of those ULIPs (at the option of the assessee) whose aggregate premium payable does not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during their term [Fifth proviso to section 10(10D)].
Thus, the amount received under any other ULIP(s) issued on or after 1.2 .2021 (referred to as specified ULIPs) to which exemption under section 10(10D) does not apply on account of applicability of the fourth and fifth provisos thereof, would be taxable under section 45(1B). The income from such specified ULIPs taxable is to be calculated in such manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, Rule 8AD prescribes the following manner to compute capital gains on receipt of amount under such specified ULIPs. Where any person receives at any time during any previous year any amount under such specified ULIP, including the amount allocated by way of bonus on such policy, then, -
-Situation where the amount is received for the first time under such specified ULIP during the previous year and Capital gains arising from receipt of amount during the previous year in which such amount is received is A-B where A = the amount received for the first time under such specified ULIP during the previous year, including the amount allocated by way of bonus on such specified policy; and B = the aggregate of the premium paid during the term of such specified ULIP till the date of receipt of the amount as referred to in “A”.
-Situation Where the amount is received under such specified ULIP during the previous year, at any time after the receipt of the amount is received for the first time under such specified ULIP during the previous year, Capital gains arising from receipt of amount during the previous year in which such amount is received is C-D, where C = the amount received under such specified ULIP during the previous year, at any time after the receipt of the amount as referred to in (i) above, including the amount allocated by way of bonus on such policy.(Note - The amount which has already been considered for calculation of taxable amount during the earlier previous year(s) would not be included in “C”.)D = the aggregate of the premium paid during the term of such specified ULIP till the date of receipt of the amount as referred to in “C” as reduced by “B” i.e., the premium that has already been considered for calculation of taxable amount during the earlier previous year(s).


The capital gains as computed in above table would be deemed to be the capital gains arising from the transfer of a unit of an equity-oriented fund set up under a scheme of an insurance company comprising unit linked insurance policies.

(4)Conversion or treatment of a capital asset as stock-in-trade [Section 45(2)]-
A person who is the owner of a capital asset may convert the same or treat it as stock-in-trade of the business carried on by him. As noted above, the conversion/treatment is a transfer.
As per section 45(2), notwithstanding anything contained in section 45(1), being the charging section, the profits or gains arising from the above conversion or treatment will be chargeable to income-tax as his income of the previous year in which such stock-in-trade is sold or otherwise transferred by him.
Full value of consideration: In order to compute the capital gains, the fair market value of the asset on the date of such conversion or treatment shall be deemed to be the full value of the consideration received as a result of the transfer of the capital asset.
In case of Conversio n of capital asset into stock-in- trade, the tax can be calculated as Components of income arising on subsequent sale of stock- in-trade - 
Capital gain = FMV on the date of conversion (-) Cost/ Indexed Cost of acquisition/ Improvement (Indexation benefit would be considered in relation to the year of conversion of capital asset into stock-in-trade)
Business Income = Sale price of stock-in- trade (-) FMV on the date of conversion
Note – Both Capital Gains and Business income are chargeable to tax in the year in which stock-in-trade is sold or otherwise transferred.
Illustartion - X converts his capital asset (acquired on June 10, 2005 for ` 60,000) into stock-in-trade on March 10, 2023. The fair market value on the date of the above conversion was ` 5,50,000. He subsequently sells the stock-in-trade so converted for ` 6,00,000 on June 10, 2023. Examine the tax implication. Cost Inflation Index - F.Y. 2005-06: 117; F.Y. 2022-23: 331; F.Y. 2023-24: 348.
Answer- Since the capital asset is converted into stock-in-trade during the previous year relevant to the A.Y. 2023-24, it will be a transfer under section 2(47) during the P.Y.2022-23. However, the profits or gains arising from the above conversion will be chargeable to tax during the A.Y. 2024-25, since the stock-in-trade has been sold only on June 10, 2023. For this purpose, the fair market value on the date of such conversion (i.e. 10th March, 2023) will be the full value of consideration.The capital gains will be computed after deducting the indexed cost of acquisition from the full value of consideration. The cost inflation index for 2005-06 i.e., the year of acquisition is 117 and the index for the year of transfer i.e., 2022-23 is 331. The indexed cost of acquisition is Rs 60,000 × 331/117 = Rs1,69,744. Hence, Rs 3,80,256 (i.e., Rs 5,50,000 – Rs 1,69,744) will be treated as long- term capital gains chargeable to tax during the A.Y.2024-25. During the same assessment year,Rs 50,000 (Rs 6,00,000 - Rs 5,50,000) will be chargeable to tax as business profits.


(5)Transfer of beneficial interest in securities [Section 45(2A)]-
As per section 45(2A), where any person has had at any time during the previous year any beneficial interest in any securities, then, any profits or gains arising from the transfer made by the depository or participant of such beneficial interest in respect of securities shall be chargeable to tax as the income of the beneficial owner of the previous year in which such transfer took place and shall not be regarded as income of the depository who is deemed to be the registered owner of the securities by virtue of section 10(1) of the Depositories Act, 1996.
Full value of consideration and period of holding: For the purposes of section 48 and proviso to section 2(42A), the cost of acquisition and the period of holding of securities shall be determined on the basis of the first-in-first-out (FIFO) method.
When the securities are transacted through stock exchanges, it is the established procedure that the brokers first enter into contracts for purchase/ sale of securities and thereafter, follow it up with delivery of shares, accompanied by transfer deeds duly signed by the registered holders.
•The seller is entitled to receive the consideration agreed to as on the date of contract.
•Thus, it is the date of broker's note that should be treated as the date of transf er in case of sale transactions of securities provided such transactions are followed up by delivery of shares and also the transfer deeds.
•Similarly, in respect of the purchasers of the securities, the holding period shall be reckoned to take place directly between the parties and not through stock exchanges.
•The date of contract of sale as declared by the parties shall be treated as the date of transfer provided it is followed up by actual delivery of shares and the transfer deeds.
Where securities are acquired in several lots at different points of time, the First -In-First-Out (FIFO) method shall be adopted to reckon the period of the holding of the security, in cases where the dates of purchase and sale could not be correlated through specific numbers of the scrips. In other words, the assets acquired last will be taken to be remaining with the assessee while assets acquired first will be treated as sold. Indexation, wherever applicable, for long -term assets will be regulated on the basis of the holding period determined in this manner - CBDT Circular No. 704, dated 28.4.1995.
Meaning of certain terms-
Beneficial owner=A person whose name is recorded as such with a depository.
Depository=A company formed and registered under the Companies Act, 2013 and which has been granted a certificate of registration under section 12(1A) of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992.
Security=Such security as may be specified by SEBI.


(6)Introduction of capital asset as capital contribution [Section 45(3)]-
Where a person transfers a capital asset to a firm, AOP or BOI in which he is already a partner/ member or is to become a partner/ member by way of capital contribution or otherwise, the profits or gains arising from such transfer will be chargeable to tax as income of the previous year in which such transfer takes place.
Full value of consideration: For this purpose, the full value of the consideration will be deemed to be the amount recorded in the books of account of the firm, AOP or BOI as the value of the capital asset.

(7)Tax implications on receipt of money or capital asset or stock-in trade by a partner or a member on dissolution or reconstitution of firm/AOPs/BOIs [Section 9B and 45(4)]-Tax implications on receipt of capital assets or stock in trade or both on dissolution or reconstitution of firm/AOP or BOI [Section 9B]
(i)Deemed transfer in the hands of specified entity - Where a specified person (partner of a firm/member of AoP/BoI) receives during the previous year any capital asset or stock in trade or both from a specified entity (firm/AoP/BoI, as the case may be) in connection with the dissolution or reconstruction of such specified entity, then such specified entity would be deemed to have transferred such capital asset or stock in trade or both, as the case may be, to the specified person in the year in which such capital asset or stock in trade or both are received by the specified person.
(ii)Year of taxability – Any profits and gains from such deemed transfer of capital asset or stock in trade or both, as the case may be, by the specified entity shall be deemed to be the income of such specified entity of the previous year in which such capital asset or stock in trade or both were received by the specified person
(iii)Head of income – Any profit and gains from such deemed transfer of capital asset would be chargeable to income-tax as income of such specified entity under the head “Capital gains”. Any profits and gains from such deemed transfer of stock in trade would be chargeable to t ax under the head “Profits and gains from business or profession”, in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(iv)Full value of consideration - In order to compute the capital gains, the fair market value of the capital asset or stock in trade or both on the date of its receipt by the specified person shall be deemed to be the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of such deemed transfer of the capital asset or stock in trade or both by the specified entity.


Tax implications on receipt of money or capital assets or both on reconstitution of firm/AOP or BOI [Section 45(4)]- 

(i)Deemed income in the hands of specified entity – Where a specified person receives during the previous year any money or capital asset or both from a specified entity in connection with the reconstitution of such specified entity, then any profits or gains arising from such receipt by the specified person shall be chargeable to income-tax as income of such specified entity under the head “Capital gains”.
(ii)Year of taxability – Such profits and gains shall be deemed to be the income of specified entity of the previous year in which such money or capital asset or both were received by the specified person.
(iii)Computation of such profits and gains from such receipt – Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, such profits or gains shall be determined in accordance with the following formula –
A = B + C – D, where, 
A = Income chargeable to income-tax u/s 45(4) as income of the specified entity under the head "Capital gains"
B = Value of any money received by the specified person from the specified entity on the date of such receipt;
C = The amount of fair market value of the capital asset received by the specified person from the specified entity on the date of such receipt; and
D = The amount of balance in the capital account (represented in any manner) of the specified person in the books of account of the specified entity at the time of its reconstitution.
If the value of "A" in the above formula is negative, its value shall be deemed to be zero.

Balance in the capital account of the specified person in the books of account of the specified entity is to be calculated without taking into account the increase in the capital account of the specified person due to the following
-revaluation of any asset or
-self-generated goodwill or
-any other self-generated asset.
"self-generated goodwill" and "self-generated asset" mean goodwill or asset, as the case may be, which has been acquired without incurring any cost for purchase or which has been generated during the course of the business or profession.


(iv)Taxability u/s 45(4) is in addition to taxability under section 9B – When a capital asset is received by a specified person from a specified entity in connection with the reconstitution of such specified entity, the provisions of this section shall operate in addition to the provisions of section 9B and the taxation under section 9B shall be worked out independently
(v)Definition of certain terms commonly used under both section 9B and 45(4):
Specified person -a person, who is a partner of a firm or member of AOPs or BOIs (not being a company or a co-operative society) in any previous year.
Specified entity - a firm or other AOPs or BOIs (not being a company or a co-operative society)
Reconstitution of the specified entity - Where(a)one or more of its partners or members, as the case may be, of such specified entity ceases to be partners or members; or (b)one or more new partners or members, as the case may be, are admitted in such specified entity in such circumstances that one or more of the persons who were partners or members, as the case may be, of the specified entity, before the change, continue as partner or partners or member or members after the change; or (c) all the partners or members, as the case may be, of such specified entity continue with a change in their respective share or in the shares of some of them.

Note: The case of dissolution of specified entity which is dealt in section 9B is not covered under section 45(4). The taxability of receipt of money by a partner of a firm/ member of AoP/BoI on reconstitution of firm/AoP/BoI, as the case may be, is dealt with only in section 45(4) and not in section 9B. The taxability of receipt of stock-in-trade by a partner of a firm/member of AoP/BoI on reconstitution is dealt with in section 9B. Therefore, it is only receipt of capital asset by a partner of a firm/member of an AoP/BoI on reconstitution of the firm/AoP/BoI which is taxable under section 9B and under section 45(4).

(vi)Type of capital gain from capital asset received by specified person from specified entity in connection with its reconstitution [Section 2(42A) Rule 8AA]: In case of the amount which is chargeable to tax as income of specified entity under section 45(4) under the head - "Capital gains", the amount or a part of it shall be deemed to be from transfer of short-term capital, if it is attributed to (a)capital asset which is short term capital asset at the time of taxation of amount under section 45(4); or (b)capital asset forming part of block of asset; or (c)capital asset being self-generated asset and self- generated goodwill as defined in section 45(4). In case of the amount which is chargeable to tax as income of specified entity under section 45(4) under the head - "Capital gains", the amount or a part of it shall be deemed to be from transfer of of a long term capital asset(s), if it is attributed to capital asset which is not covered above and is long term capital asset at the time of taxation of amount under section 45(4).

(vii)Attribution of capital gains: For the purpose of section 48(iii), where the amount is chargeable to income-tax as income of specified entity under section 45(4), the specified entity shall attribute such amount to capital asset remaining with the specified entity in the prescribed manner:
Accordingly, Rule 8AB provides that the specified entity shall attribute such amount to capital asset remaining with the specified entity in the following manner:
Where the aggregate of the value of money and the fair market value of the capital asset received by the specified person from the specified entity, in excess of the balance in his
capital account, chargeable to tax under section 45(4) -
- relates to revaluation of any capital asset or valuation of self-generatedasset or self-generated goodwill, of the specified entity.The revaluation should be based on a valuation report obtained from a registered valuer. = the amount charged u/s 45(4) * (increase in, or recognition of, value of that  asset  because  of revaluation or valuation/aggregate of increase in,
or recognition of, value of all assets because of the revaluation or valuation)
-does not relate to revaluation of any capital asset or valuation of self generated  asset  or  self-generatedgoodwill, of the specified entity = the amount charged to tax under section 45(4) shall not be attributed to any capital asset
-relate only to the capital asset received by the specified person from the specified entity=the amount charged to tax under section 45(4) shall not be attributed to any capital asset

The specified entity shall furnish the details of amount attributed to capital asset remaining with the specified entity in Form No. 5C.
Form No. 5C shall be furnished on or before the due date referred to in the Explanation 2 below section 139(1) for the assessment year in which the amount is chargeable to tax under section 45(4).
It is clarified that revaluation of an asset or valuation of self -generated asset or self-generated goodwill does not entitle the specified entity for the depreciation on the increase in value of that asset on account of its revaluation or recognition of the value of self -generated asset or self- generated goodwill due to its valuation.

(viii)	Power of CBDT to issue guidelines [Section 9B(4) and 9B(5)] - If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of section 9B and section 45(4), the CBDT may issue guidelines for the purpose of removing the difficulty with the approval of the Central Government.
 
Every guideline issued by the CBDT shall be laid before each House of Parliament, and shall be binding on the income-tax authorities and on the assessee.
Guidelines under section 9B and section 45(4) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 [Circular No. 14/2021 dated 2.7.2021]
The amount taxed under section 45(4) is required to be attributed to the remaining capital assets of the specified entity, so that when such capital assets get transferred in the future, the amount attributed to such capital assets gets reduced from the full value of the consideration and to that extent the specified entity does not pay tax again on the same amount.
This attribution is given only for the purposes of section 48. Section 48 only applies to capital assets which are not forming block of assets. For capital assets forming block of assets there is section 43(6)(c) to determine written down value of the block of asset and section 50 to determine the capital gains arising on transfer of such assets.
However, the Act has not yet provided that amount taxed under section 45(4) can also be attributed to capital assets forming part of block of assets and which are covered by these two provisions.
The CBDT has, vide this circular, clarified that Rule 8AB also applies to capital assets forming part of block of assets. Wherever the terms capital asset is appearing in the Rule 8AB, it refers to capital asset whose capital gains is computed under section 48 as well as capital asset forming part of block of assets. Further, wherever reference is made for the purposes of section 48, such reference may be deemed to include reference for the purposes of section 43(6)(c) and section 50.
It is further clarified that in case the capital asset remaining with the specified entity is forming part of a block of asset, the amount attributed to such capital asset under rule 8AB shall be reduced from the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of subsequent transfer of such asset by the specified entity, and the net value of such consideration shall be considered for reduction from the written down value of such block under section 43(6)(c) or for calculation of capital gains, as the case may be, under section 50.
For the purposes of understanding and for removing difficulties, if any, the application of section 9B and section 45(4) is explained with the help of the following examples:
Example 1: There are three partners “A”, “B” and "C" in a firm "FR", having one third share each. Each partner has a capital balance of Rs 10 lakh in the firm. There are three pieces of lands “S”, “T” and “U” in that firm and there is no other capital asset in that firm. Book value of each of the land is Rs 10 lakh. All these three lands were acquired by the firm more than two years ago.
 
Partner “A” wishes to exit. The firm revalues its lands based on valuation report from a registered valuer, as defined in rule 11U, and as per that valuation report fair market value of lands “S” and “T” is Rs 70 lakh each, while fair market value of land “U” is Rs 50 lakh. On the exit of partner “A", the firm decides to give him Rs 11 lakh of money and land “U” to settle his capital balance.
In accordance with the provisions of section 9B, it would be deemed that the firm “FR" has transferred land “U” to the partner "A" at its fair market value of Rs 50 lakh. Let us assume that the indexed cost of acquisition of land “U" is  Rs 15 Iakh.
Now on account of the deeming provisions of section 9B, it is deemed that the firm “FR" has transferred land “U” to partner “A". Thus, an amount of Rs 50 lakh less Rs 15 lakh would be charged to tax in the hands of firm “FR" under the head “Capital gains”. For partner “A", the cost of acquisition of this land would be Rs 50 lakh. Hence, the amount of Rs 35 lakh is charged to long term capital gains and let us assume that the tax is Rs 7 lakh (assume no surcharge or cess just for ease of calculation and illustration purposes).
This, net book profit after tax of Rs 33 lakh (capital gains of Rs 40 lakh without indexation less tax of Rs 7 lakh) is to be credited in the capital account of each of the three partners, i.e. Rs 11 lakh each. Thus partner “A" capital account would increase to Rs 21 lakh. This exercise is required to be carried out since section 9B mandates that it is to be deemed that the firm “FR" has transferred the land “U" to partner "A" and the long term capital gains of Rs 35 lakh is chargeable to tax in the hands of the firm “FR".
As against capital balance of Rs 21 lakh, partner “A" has received Rs  61 lakh (Rs 11 lakh of money plus land “U" of fair market value of Rs 50 lakh). Thus Rs 40 lakh is required to be charged to tax under section 45(4). This shall be in addition to an amount of Rs 35 lakh charged to tax under section 9B.
On account of clause (iii) of section 48, read with rule 8AB, this Rs 40 lakh is to be attributed to the remaining assets of the firm “FR" on the basis of increase in their value due to revaluation based on the valuation report of registered valuer. In this case as per revaluation there are only two capital assets remaining; lands “S" and “T". In both cases the value has increased by Rs 60 lakh each. Thus, out of Rs 40 lakh, Rs 20 lakh shall be attributed to land “S" and Rs 20 lakh to land “T". When either of these lands gets sold, this amount attributed to them would be reduced from sales consideration under clause (iii) of section 48.
The amount of Rs 40 lakh which is charged to tax under section 45(4) shall be charged as long term capital gains in view of rule 8AA(5), since the amount of Rs 40 lakh is attributed to land “S" and land “T" which are both long term capital assets at the time of taxation of Rs 40 lakh under section 45(4).
 
Example 2: There are three partners “A", “B" and “C" in a firm “FR", having one third share each. Each partner has a capital balance of Rs 10 lakh in the firm. There are three pieces of lands “S", “T" and “U" in that firm and there is no other capital asset in that fi rm. All these three lands were acquired by the firm more than two years ago.
Book value of each of the land is Rs 10 lakh. Partner “A" wishes to exit. The firm sells land “U" for its fair market value of ` 50 lakh. Let us assume that the indexed cost of acquisition of land “U" is Rs 15 lakh. Thus, an amount of Rs 50 lakh less Rs 15 lakh would be charged to tax in the hands of firm “FR" under the head “Capital gains". Hence, the amount of Rs 35 lakh is charged to long term capital gains and let us assume that the tax is Rs 7 lakh (assume no surcharge or cess just for ease of calculation and illustration purposes).
This, net book profit after tax of Rs 33 lakh (capital gains of Rs 40 lakh without indexation less tax of Rs 7 lakh) is to be credited in the capital account of each of the three partners, i.e. Rs 11 lakh each. Thus, partner “A” capital account would increase to Rs 21 lakh.

Partner “A” decides to exit the firm “FR”. The firm revalues its lands “S” and “T” based on valuation report from a registered valuer, as defined in Rule 11U, and as per that valuation report fair market value of lands “S” and “T” is Rs 70 lakh each. On the exit of partner “A”, the firm decides to give him Rs 61 lakh of money to settle his capital balance. Thus, as against capital balance of Rs 21 lakh, partner “A” has received Rs 61 lakh of money. Thus Rs 40 lakh is required to be charged to tax section 45(4). This will be in addition to Rs 35 lakh already charged to capital gains.
On account of section 48(iii), read with rule 8AB, this Rs 40 lakh is to be attributed to the remaining assets of the firm “FR” on the basis of increase in their value due to revaluation based on the valuation report of registered valuer. In this case, as per revaluation, there are only two capital assets remaining: lands “S” and “T”. In both cases, the value has increased by Rs 60 lakh each. Thus, out of Rs 40 lakh, Rs  20 lakh shall be attributed to land “S” and Rs 20 Lakh to land “’T’’. When either of these lands gets sold, this amount attributed to them would be reduced from sales consideration under section 48(iii).
The amount of Rs 40 lakh which is charged to tax under section 45(4) shall be charged as long term capital gains in view of rule 8AA(5), since the amount of Rs 40 lakh is attributed to land “S” and land “T” which are both long term capital assets at the time of taxation of Rs 40 lakh under section 45(4).
Note: The final result in both example 1 and 2 is same due to the operation of section 9B.

Example 3: There are three partners “A”, “B” and “C” in a firm “FR”, having one third share each. Each partner has a capital balance of ` 100 lakh in the firm. There is a piece of land “S” of book value of ` 30 lakh. There is patent “T” of written down value of Rs 45 lakh. And there is cash of Rs 225 lakh. The land was acquired by the firm more than two years ago. The patent was acquired/ developed/ registered one year back. Partner “A” wishes to exit. The firm revalues its land and patent based on valuation report from a registered valuer, as defined in rule 11U, and as per that valuation report, fair market value of land “S” is Rs 45 lakh and fair market value of patent “T” is Rs 60 lakh. As per the valuation report, there is also self-generated goodwill of Rs 30 lakh. On the exit of partner “A”, the firm decides to give him Rs 75 lakh in money and land “S" to settle his capital balance. In accordance with the provisions of section 9B, it would be deemed that the firm “FR" has transferred land “S" to the partner “A" at its fair market value of ` 45 lakh. Let us assume that the indexed cost of acquisition of land “S" is Rs 45 lakh.
Now, on account of the deeming provisions of section 9B, it is deemed that the firm “FR" has transferred land “S" to partner “A". However, since the sale consideration is equal to indexed cost of acquisition, there will not be any capital gains tax. For partner “A", the cost of acquisition of this land would be Rs 45 lakh. The net book profit of Rs 15 lakh (capital gains of Rs 15 lakh without indexation) is to be credited in the capital account of each of the three partners, i.e., Rs 5 lakh each. Thus, partner “A" capital account would increase to Rs 105 lakh. This exercise is required to be carried out since section 9B mandates that it is to be deemed that the firm “FR" has transferred the land “S" to partner “A". Thus, any gain in the books is to be apportioned to partners' capital accounts. As against capital balance of Rs 105 lakh, partner “A" has received Rs 120 lakh (money of Rs 75 Lakh plus land “S" of fair market value of Rs 45 lakh). Thus, Rs 15 lakh is required to be charged to tax under section 45(4).On account of section 48(iii), read with rule 8AB and this guidance note, this Rs 15 lakh is to be attributed to the remaining capital assets of the firm “FR" on the basis of increase in the value due to revaluation of existing capital assets, or due to recognition of the value of self -generated goodwill, based on the valuation report of registered valuer. In this case, as per this report, the value of patent “T" has increased by ` 15 lakh and the self-generated goodwill value has been recognised at Rs 30 lakh. Thus, one third of Rs 15 lakh (i.e. Rs 5 lakh) would be attributed to patent “T", while two third of Rs 15 lakh (i.e. Rs 10 lakh) would be attributed to self-generated goodwill. Rs 5 lakh attributed to patent “T" shall not be added to the block of the assets and no depreciation shall be available on the same. When patent “T" gets transferred subsequently, this Rs 5 lakh attributed shall be reduced from the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer of patent “T" by the firm “FR", and the net value shall be considered for reduction from the written down value of the intangible block under section 43(6)(c) or for calculation of capital gains, as the case may be, under section 50. (Refer guidance in paragraph 5 of this circular). Let us say that Patent T is sold for Rs 25 lakh. Rs 5 lakh shall be reduced from Rs 25 lakh and only net amount of
Rs 20 lakh shall be considered for reduction from the written down value of the intangible block under section 43(6)(c) or for calculation of capital gains, as the case may be, under section 50. Similarly, when goodwill gets sold subsequently, Rs 10 lakh would be reduced from its sales consideration under section 48(iii).
The amount Rs 15 lakh which is charged to tax under section 45(4) shall be charged as short term capital gains, as Rs 5 lakh is attributed to the Patent “T" which is part of block of assets and Rs 10 lakh is attributed to self-generated goodwill. In accordance with rule 8AA(5), both of these are to be characterised as short term capital gains.
Note: For the purpose of calculation of depreciation under section 32, the written down value of the block of asset “intangible" of which Patent “T" is part, would remain Rs 45 lakh and would not be increased to Rs 60 lakh due to revaluation during the year. In this regard it may be highlighted that the following provisions are relevant in determining the amount on which depreciation is allowable under the Act:
•Explanation 2 of section 32(1) provides that the term "written down value of the block of assets" shall have the same meaning as in section 43(6)(c).
•Section 43(6)(c), with respect to block of assets, inter alia, provides that the aggregate of the written down values of all the assets falling within that block of assets at the beginning of the previous year is to be increased by the actual cost of any asset falling within that block, acquired during the previous year. This clause does not allow any increase on account of revaluation.
•Section 43(1) which defines “Actual cost" as actual cost of the assets to the assessee. In
revaluation, there is no actual cost to the assessee.
Further, section 32 does not allow depreciation on goodwill. If in the given example “self-generated goodwill" is replaced by “self-generated asset", even then, the depreciation will not be admissible on the amount of Rs 30 lakh recognised in valuation. In this regard it may be highlighted that the above mentioned provisions, in the immediate preceding paragraph, are also applicable to “self - generated asset" and since there is no actual cost to assessee in case of “self -generated asset", depreciation is not allowable under section 32 on an asset whose actual cost is nil.





(8)Compensation on compulsory acquisition [Section 45(5)]- Sometimes, a building or some other capital asset belonging to a person is taken over by the Central Government by way of compulsory acquisition. In that case, the consideration for the transfer is determined by the Central Government or RBI. When the Central Government pays the above compensation, capital gains may arise. Such capital gains are chargeable as income of the previous year in which such compensation or part thereof, was first received.
Enhanced Compensation- Many times, persons whose capital assets have been taken over by the Central Government and who get compensation from the government go to the court of law for enhancement of compensation. If the court awards a compensation which is higher than the original compensation, the difference thereof will be chargeable to capital gains in the year in which the same is received from the government.
Cost of acquisition in case of enhanced compensation - For this purpose, the cost of acquisition and cost of improvement shall be taken to be nil.
Compensation received in pursuance of an interim order deemed as income chargeable to tax in the year of final order - In order to remove the uncertainty regarding the year in which the amount of compensation received in pursuance of an interim order of the court is to be charged to tax, a proviso has been inserted after clause (b) to provide that such compensation shall be deemed to be income chargeable under the head ‘Capital gains’ in the previous year in which the final order of such court, Tribunal or other authority is made.
Reduction of enhanced compensation - Where capital gain has been charged on the compensation received by the assessee for the compulsory acquisition of any capital asset or enhanced compensation received by the assessee and subsequently such compensation is reduced by any court, tribunal or any authority, the assessed capital gain of that year shall be recomputed by taking into consideration the reduced amount. This re-computation shall be done by way of rectification under section 155.
Death of the transferor- It is possible that the transferor may die before he receives the enhanced compensation. In that case, the enhanced compensation or consideration will be chargeable to tax in the hands of the person who receives the same.

(9)Taxability of capital gains in case of Specified Agreement [Section 45(5A)]
Genuine hardship on account of taxability of capital gains in the year of transfer of property to developer: The definition of 'transfer', inter alia, includes any arrangement or transaction where any rights are handed over in execution of part performance of contract, even though the legal title has not been transferred.
 
Applying the definition of transfer, under these development agreements, the transfer took place in the year in which the owner of the immovable property, being land or building or both handed over the immovable property to the developer.
Consequently, the capital gains tax liability in the hands of the owner would arise in the year in which the possession of immovable property is handed over to the developer for development of a project, in spite of the fact that the consideration thereof (i.e. the actual constructed property) will be received only after a couple of years.
Deferment of taxability of capital gains: With a view to minimise the genuine hardship which the owner of land or building may face in paying capital gains tax in the year of transfer, section 45(5A) provides that
-in case of an assessee being individual or Hindu undivided family,
-who enters into a specified agreement for development of a project,
-the capital gain arises from such transfer shall be chargeable to income-tax as income of the previous year in which the certificate of completion for the whole or part of the project is issued by the competent authority.
Meaning of Specified Agreement: Specified agreement means the registered agreement in which a person owing land or building or both, agrees to allow another person to develop a real estate project on such land or building or both, in consideration of a share, being land or building or both in such project, whether with or without payment of part of the consideration in cash .
Full value of consideration: For the purpose of section 48, the stamp duty value of his share, being land or building or both, in the project on the date of issuing of said certificate of completion as increased by any consideration received in cash or by a cheque or draft or by any other mode, if any, shall be deemed to be the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of the capital asset.
Non-applicability of the beneficial provision: It may, however, be noted these beneficial provisions would not apply, where the assessee transfers his share in the project on or before the date of issue of said completion certificate and the capital gain tax liability would be deemed to arise in the previous year in which such transfer took place. In such a case, full value of consideration received or accruing shall be determined by the general provisions of the Act. [Proviso to section 45(5A)]
Meaning of certain Terms - Competent authority - The authority empowered to approve the building plan by or under any law for the time being in force. Stamp duty value- The value adopted or assessed or reassessable by any authority of Government for the purpose of payment of stamp duty in respect of an immovable property being land or building or both.


CAPITAL GAINS ON DISTRIBUTION OF ASSETS BY COMPANIES IN LIQUIDATION [SECTION 46]
(1)In the hands of liquidated company: Where the assets of a company are distributed to its shareholders on its liquidation, such distribution not be regarded as a transfer by the shall company for the purposes of section 45 [Section 46(1)]. 
The above section is restricted in its application to the circumstances mentioned therein i.e., the assets of the company must be distributed to shareholders on the liquidation of the company. If, however, the liquidator sells the assets of the company resulting in a capital gain and distributes the funds so collected, the company will be liable to pay tax on such gains.
(2)In the hands of shareholders: Shareholders receive money or other assets from the company on its liquidation. They will be chargeable to income-tax under the head ‘capital gains’ in respect of the market value of the assets received on the date of distribution, or the moneys so received by them. The portion of the distribution which is attributable to the accumulated profits of the company is to be treated as dividend income of the shareholder under section 2(22)(c), which would be taxable in the hands of shareholders under the head “Income from other sources”. The same will be deducted from the amount received/ fair market value for the purpose of determining the full value of consideration for computation of capital gains.
(3)Capital gains tax on subsequent sale by the shareholders: If the shareholder, after receipt of any such asset on liquidation of the company, transfers it, then Fair Market Value on the date of distribution would be treated as cost of acquisition of such asset.

To summarise, Capital Gains on distribution of assets by companies in liquidation (section 46) in the hands of the company is not a transfer. Hence, No capital gains tax liability in hands of company. Capital Gains on distribution of assets by companies in liquidation (section 46) In the hands of the shareholders, Distribution attributable to accumulated profits will be Deemed dividend u/s 2(22)(c) and taxable in the hands of shareholders as “Income from Other Sources” and for calulating capital gain, Full value of consideration for the purpose of section 48 will be computed as [Money received (+) FMV of assets distributed (-) deemed dividend u/s 2(22)(c)] and To be considered for computing Capital Gains in the hands of shareholders.


CAPITAL	GAINS ON BUYBACK OF SHARES OR OTHER SECURITIES [SECTION 46A]

(1)In case of specified securities other than shares: Any consideration received by a holder of specified securities (other than shares) from any company on purchase of its specified securities is chargeable to tax in the hands of the holder of specified securities. The difference between the cost of acquisition and the value of consideration received by the holder of securities is chargeable to tax as capital gains in his hands. The computation of capital gains shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section 48 . Such capital gains shall be chargeable in the year in which such securities were purchased by the company. For this purpose, “specified securities” shall have the same meaning as given in Explanation to section 77A of the Companies Act, 2013. As per Section 68 of the Companies Act, 2013, "specified securities" includes employees' stock. 
Note – As far as shares are concerned, this provision would be attracted in the hands of the shareholder only if the shares are bought back by a company, other than a domestic company.

(2)In case of shares (whether listed or unlisted): In case of buyback of shares (whether listed or unlisted) by domestic companies, additional income-tax @20% (plus surcharge@12% and cess@4%) is leviable in the hands of the company under section 115QA. Consequently, the income arising to the shareholders in respect of such buyback of shares by the domestic company would be exempt under section 10(34A), since the domestic company is liable to pay additional income-tax on the buyback of shares.

Taxation provisions in respect of buyback-
Taxability in the hands of Company-Buyback of shares by domestic companies Subject to additional income-tax@23.296%. Buyback of shares by a company, other than a domestic company is Not subject to tax in the hands of the company. Buyback of specified securities by any company is Not subject to tax in the hands of the company.

Taxability in the hands of Shareholder/ holder of specified securities - Buyback of shares by domestic companies is Income arising to shareholders exempt under section 10(34A). Buyback of shares by a company, other than a domestic company is Income arising to shareholder taxable as capital gains u/s 46A. Buyback of specified securities by any company is Buyback of specified securities by any company.


IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS

(a)Amalgamation [Section 2(1B)] - “Amalgamation”, in relation to companies, means
-the merger of one or more companies with another company or
-the merger of two or more companies to form one company
(the company or companies which so merge being referred to as the amalgamating company or companies and the company with which they merge or which is formed as a result of the merger, as the amalgamated company) in such a manner that -
(i)all the property of the amalgamating company or companies immediately before the amalgamation becomes the property of the amalgamated company by virtue of the amalgamation;
(ii)all the liabilities of the amalgamating company or companies immediately before the amalgamation become the liabilities of the amalgamated company by virtue of the amalgamation;
(iii)shareholders holding not less than three-fourth in value of the shares in the amalgamating company or companies (other than shares already held therein immediately before the amalgamation by, or by a nominee for, the amalgamated company or its subsidiary) become shareholders of the amalgamated company by virtue of the amalgamation, otherwise than as a result of the acquisition of the property of one company by another company pursuant to the purchase of such property by the other company or as a result of the distribution of such property to the other company after the winding up of the first mentioned company.


(b)Demerger [Section 2(19AA)] - “Demerger”, in relation to companies, means the transfer, pursuant to a scheme of arrangement under sections 230 to 232 of the Companies Act, 2013, by a demerged company of its one or more undertaking to any resulting company in such a manner that -
(i)all the property of the undertaking, being transferred by the demerged company, immediately before the demerger, becomes the property of the resulting company by virtue of the demerger;
(ii)all the liabilities relatable to the undertaking, being transferred by the demerged company, immediately before the demerger, become the liabilities of the resulting company by virtue of the demerger;
(iii)the property and the liabilities of the undertaking or undertakings being transferred by the demerged company are transferred at values appearing in its books of account immediately before the demerger;
However, this provision does not apply where, in compliance to the Indian Accounting Standards specified in Annexure to the Companies (Indian Accounting Standards) Rules, 2015, the resulting company records the value of the property and the liabilities of the undertaking or undertakings at a value different from the value appearing in the books of account of the demerged company, immediately before the demerger.
(iv)the resulting company issues, in consideration of the demerger, its shares to the shareholders of the demerged company on a proportionate basis except where the resulting company itself is a shareholder of the demerged company;
Note - If the resulting company is a shareholder of the demerged company, it cannot issue shares to itself. However, the resulting company has to issue shares to the other shareholders of the demerged company.
(v)the shareholders holding not less than three-fourths in value of the shares in the demerged company (other than shares already held therein immediately before the demerger, or by a nominee for, the resulting company or, its subsidiary) become shareholders of the resulting company or companies by virtue of the demerger, otherwise than as a result of the acquisition of the property or assets of the demerged company or any undertaking thereof by the resulting company;
(vi)the transfer of the undertaking is on a going concern basis;
(vii)the demerger is in accordance with the conditions, if any, notified under section 72A(5) by the Central Government in this behalf.

(c)Undertaking - Includes
-any part of an undertaking or a unit or division of an undertaking or
-a business activity taken as a whole,
However, it does not include individual assets or liabilities or any combination thereof not constituting a business activity.

(d)Liabilities-Includes
(i)the liabilities which arise out of the activities or operations of the undertaking;
(ii)the specific loans or borrowings (including debentures) raised, incurred and utilised solely for the activities or operations of the undertaking; and
(iii)in cases, other than those referred to in clause(i) or clause (ii), so much of the amounts of general or multipurpose borrowings, if any, of the demerged company as stand in the same proportion which the value of the assets transferred in a demerger bears to the total value of the assets of such demerged company immediately before the demerger.

(e)Property- For the purpose of determining the value of the property, any change in the value of assets consequent to their revaluation shall be ignored.

(f)Splitting up or reconstruction-Splitting up or the reconstruction of
-any authority or
-a body constituted or established under a Central, State or Provincial Act, or
-a local authority or
-a public sector company,
into separate authorities or bodies or local authorities or companies, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be a demerger if such split up or reconstruction fulfils such conditions as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette.The reconstruction or splitting up of a company, which ceased to be a public sector company as a result of transfer of its shares by the Central Government, into separate companies, shall be deemed to be a demerger, if such reconstruction or splitting up has been made to give effect to any condition attached to the said transfer of shares and also fulfils such other conditions as may be notified by the Central Government.
The reconstruction or splitting up of a public sector company into separate companies shall be deemed to be a demerger, if such reconstruction or splitting up has been made to transfer any asset of the demerged company to the resulting company and the resulting company –is a public sector company on the appointed day indicated in such scheme, as may be approved by the Central Government or any other body authorised under the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 or any other law for the time being in force governing such public sector companies in this behalf; and fulfils such other conditions as may be notified by the Central Government.

(g)Demerged company [Section 2(19AAA)] - Demerged company means the company whose undertaking is transferred, pursuant to a demerger, to a resulting company.

(h)Resulting company [Section 2(41A)] - Resulting company means one or more companies (including a wholly owned subsidiary thereof) to which the undertaking of the demerged company is transferred in a demerger and, the resulting company in consideration of such transfer of undertaking, issues shares to the shareholders of the demerged company and includes any authority or body or local authority or public sector company or a company established, constituted or formed as a result of demerger.

SECTION 47- TRANSACTIONS NOT REGARDED AS TRANSFER
Nothing contained in section 45 shall apply to the following transfers :—

(i) any distribution of capital assets on the total or partial partition of a Hindu undivided family;

(ii) [***]

(iii) any transfer of a capital asset under a gift or will or an irrevocable trust :

Provided that this clause shall not apply to transfer under a gift or an irrevocable trust of a capital asset being shares, debentures or warrants allotted by a company directly or indirectly to its employees under any Employees' Stock Option Plan or Scheme of the company offered to such employees in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central Government in this behalf;

(iv) any transfer of a capital asset by a company to its subsidiary company, if—

(a) the parent company or its nominees hold the whole of the share capital of the subsidiary company, and

(b) the subsidiary company is an Indian company;

(v) any transfer of a capital asset by a subsidiary company to the holding company, if—

(a) the whole of the share capital of the subsidiary company is held by the holding company, and

(b) the holding company is an Indian company :

Provided that nothing contained in clause (iv) or clause (v) shall apply to the transfer of a capital asset made after the 29th day of February, 1988, as stock-in-trade;

(vi) any transfer, in a scheme of amalgamation, of a capital asset by the amalgamating company to the amalgamated company if the amalgamated company is an Indian company;

(via) any transfer, in a scheme of amalgamation, of a capital asset being a share or shares held in an Indian company, by the amalgamating foreign company to the amalgamated foreign company, if—

(a) at least twenty-five per cent of the shareholders of the amalgamating foreign company continue to remain shareholders of the amalgamated foreign company, and

(b) such transfer does not attract tax on capital gains in the country, in which the amalgamating company is incorporated;

(viaa) any transfer, in a scheme of amalgamation of a banking company with a banking institution sanctioned and brought into force by the Central Government under sub-section (7) of section 45 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), of a capital asset by the banking company to the banking institution.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—

(i) "banking company" shall have the same meaning assigned to it in clause (c) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);

(ii) "banking institution" shall have the same meaning assigned to it in sub-section (15) of section 45 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);

(viab) any transfer, in a scheme of amalgamation, of a capital asset, being a share of a foreign company, referred to in the Explanation 5 to clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 9, which derives, directly or indirectly, its value substantially from the share or shares of an Indian company, held by the amalgamating foreign company to the amalgamated foreign company, if—

(A) at least twenty-five per cent of the shareholders of the amalgamating foreign company continue to remain shareholders of the amalgamated foreign company; and

(B) such transfer does not attract tax on capital gains in the country in which the amalgamating company is incorporated;

(vib) any transfer, in a demerger, of a capital asset by the demerged company to the resulting company, if the resulting company is an Indian company;

(vic) any transfer in a demerger, of a capital asset, being a share or shares held in an Indian company, by the demerged foreign company to the resulting foreign company, if—

(a) the shareholders holding not less than three-fourths in value of the shares of the demerged foreign company continue to remain shareholders of the resulting foreign company; and

(b) such transfer does not attract tax on capital gains in the country, in which the demerged foreign company is incorporated:

Provided that the provisions of sections 391 to 39485 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) shall not apply in case of demergers referred to in this clause;

(vica) any transfer in a business reorganisation, of a capital asset by the predecessor co-operative bank to the successor co-operative bank or to the converted banking company;

(vicb) any transfer by a shareholder, in a business reorganisation, of a capital asset being a share or shares held by him in the predecessor co-operative bank if the transfer is made in consideration of the allotment to him of any share or shares in the successor co-operative bank or to the converted banking company.

Explanation.—For the purposes of clauses (vica) and (vicb), the expressions "business reorganisation", "converted banking company", "predecessor co-operative bank" and "successor co-operative bank" shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in section 44DB;

(vicc) any transfer in a demerger, of a capital asset, being a share of a foreign company, referred to in the Explanation 5 to clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 9, which derives, directly or indirectly, its value substantially from the share or shares of an Indian company, held by the demerged foreign company to the resulting foreign company, if—

(a) the shareholders, holding not less than three-fourths in value of the shares of the demerged foreign company, continue to remain shareholders of the resulting foreign company; and

(b) such transfer does not attract tax on capital gains in the country in which the demerged foreign company is incorporated:

Provided that the provisions of sections 391 to 394 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) shall not apply in case of demergers referred to in this clause;

(vid) any transfer or issue of shares by the resulting company, in a scheme of demerger to the shareholders of the demerged company if the transfer or issue is made in consideration of demerger of the undertaking;

(vii) any transfer by a shareholder, in a scheme of amalgamation, of a capital asset being a share or shares held by him in the amalgamating company, if—

(a) the transfer is made in consideration of the allotment to him of any share or shares in the amalgamated company except where the shareholder itself is the amalgamated company, and

(b) the amalgamated company is an Indian company;

Example:Let us take a case where A Ltd., an Indian company, holds 60% of shares in B Ltd. B Ltd. amalgamates with A Ltd. Since A Ltd. itself is the shareholder of B Ltd., A Ltd., being the amalgamated company, cannot issue shares to itself. However, A Ltd. has to issue shares to the other shareholders of B Ltd.

(viia) any transfer of a capital asset, being bonds or Global Depository Receipts referred to in sub-section (1) of section 115AC, made outside India by a non-resident to another non-resident;

(viiaa) any transfer, made outside India, of a capital asset being rupee denominated bond of an Indian company issued outside India, by a non-resident to another non-resident;

(viiab) any transfer of a capital asset, being—

(a) bond or Global Depository Receipt referred to in sub-section (1) of section 115AC; or

(b) rupee denominated bond of an Indian company; or

(c) derivative; or

(d) such other securities as may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf,

made by a non-resident on a recognised stock exchange located in any International Financial Services Centre and where the consideration for such transaction is paid or payable in foreign currency.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—

(a) "International Financial Services Centre" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (q) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005);

(b) "recognised stock exchange" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (ii) of Explanation 1 to clause (5) of section 43;

(c) "derivative" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (ac) of section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956);

(d) "securities" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (h) of section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956);

(viiac) any transfer, in a relocation, of a capital asset by the original fund to the resulting fund;

(viiad) any transfer by a shareholder or unit holder or interest holder, in a relocation, of a capital asset being a share or unit or interest held by him in the original fund in consideration for the share or unit or interest in the resultant fund.

Explanation.— For the purposes of clauses (viiac) and (viiad),—

(a) "original fund" means—

(A) a fund established or incorporated or registered outside India, which collects funds from its members for investing it for their benefit and fulfils the following conditions, namely:—

(i) the fund is not a person resident in India;

(ii) the fund is a resident of a country or a specified territory with which an agreement referred to in sub-section (1) of section 90 or sub-section (1) of section 90A has been entered into; or is established or incorporated or registered in a country or a specified territory as may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf;

(iii) the fund and its activities are subject to applicable investor protection regulations in the country or specified territory where it is established or incorporated or is a resident; and

(iv) fulfils such other conditions as may be prescribed;

(B) an investment vehicle, in which Abu Dhabi Investment Authority is the direct or indirect sole shareholder or unit holder or beneficiary or interest holder and such investment vehicle is wholly owned and controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority or the Government of Abu Dhabi; or

(C) a fund notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette in this behalf subject to such conditions as may be specified;]

(b) "relocation" means transfer of assets of the original fund, or of its wholly owned special purpose vehicle, to a resultant fund on or before the 31st day of March, 2025, where consideration for such transfer is discharged in the form of share or unit or interest in the resulting fund to,—

(i) shareholder or unit holder or interest holder of the original fund, in the same proportion in which the share or unit or interest was held by such shareholder or unit holder or interest holder in such original fund, in lieu of their shares or units or interests in the original fund; or

(ii) the original fund, in the same proportion as referred to in sub-clause (i), in respect of which the share or unit or interest is not issued by resultant fund to its shareholder or unit holder or interest holder;

(c) "resultant fund" means a fund established or incorporated in India in the form of a trust or a company or a limited liability partnership, which—

(i) has been granted a certificate of registration as a Category I or Category II or Category III Alternative Investment Fund, and is regulated under the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Alternative Investment Fund) Regulations, 2012 made under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) or regulated under the International Financial Services Centres Authority (Fund Management) Regulations, 2022, made under the International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019 (50 of 2019); and

(ii) is located in any International Financial Services Centre as referred to in sub-section (1A) of section 80LA;

(viiae) any transfer of capital asset by India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited to an institution established for financing the infrastructure and development, set up under an Act of Parliament and notified by the Central Government for the purposes of this clause;

(viiaf) any transfer of capital asset, under a plan approved by the Central Government, by a public sector company to another public sector company notified by the Central Government for the purposes of this clause or to the Central Government or to a State Government;]

(viib) any transfer of a capital asset, being a Government Security carrying a periodic payment of interest, made outside India through an intermediary dealing in settlement of securities, by a non-resident to another non-resident.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, "Government Security" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (b) of section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956);

(viic) any transfer of Sovereign Gold Bond issued by the Reserve Bank of India under the Sovereign Gold Bond Scheme, 2015, by way of redemption, by an assessee being an individual;

Following clause (viid) shall be inserted after clause (viic) of section 47 by the Finance Act, 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024:

(viid) any transfer of a capital asset, being conversion of gold into Electronic Gold Receipt issued by a Vault Manager, or conversion of Electronic Gold Receipt into gold.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the expressions "Electronic Gold Receipt" and "Vault Manager" shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses (h) and (l) of sub-regulation (1) of regulation 2 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Vault Managers) Regulations, 2021 made under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);

(viii) any transfer of agricultural land in India effected before the 1st day of March, 1970;

(ix) any transfer of a capital asset, being any work of art, archaeological, scientific or art collection, book, manuscript, drawing, painting, photograph or print, to the Government or a University or the National Museum, National Art Gallery, National Archives or any such other public museum or institution as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette to be of national importance or to be of renown throughout any State or States.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, "University" means a University established or incorporated by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act and includes an institution declared under section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956), to be a University for the purposes of that Act;

(x) any transfer by way of conversion of bonds or debentures, debenture-stock or deposit certificates in any form, of a company into shares or debentures of that company;

(xa) any transfer by way of conversion of bonds referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 115AC into shares or debentures of any company;

(xb) any transfer by way of conversion of preference shares of a company into equity shares of that company;

(xi) any transfer made on or before the 31st day of December, 1998 by a person (not being a company) of a capital asset being membership of a recognised stock exchange to a company in exchange of shares allotted by that company to the transferor.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the expression "membership of a recognised stock exchange" means the membership of a stock exchange in India which is recognised under the provisions of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956);

(xii) any transfer of a capital asset, being land of a sick industrial company, made under a scheme prepared and sanctioned under section 18 of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (1 of 1986) where such sick industrial company is being managed by its workers' co-operative:

Provided that such transfer is made during the period commencing from the previous year in which the said company has become a sick industrial company under sub-section (1) of section 17 of that Act and ending with the previous year during which the entire net worth of such company becomes equal to or exceeds the accumulated losses.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, "net worth" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (ga) of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (1 of 1986);

(xiii) any transfer of a capital asset or intangible asset by a firm to a company as a result of succession of the firm by a company in the business carried on by the firm, or any transfer of a capital asset to a company in the course of demutualisation or corporatisation of a recognised stock exchange in India as a result of which an association of persons or body of individuals is succeeded by such company:

Provided that—

(a) all the assets and liabilities of the firm or of the association of persons or body of individuals relating to the business immediately before the succession become the assets and liabilities of the company;

(b) all the partners of the firm immediately before the succession become the shareholders of the company in the same proportion in which their capital accounts stood in the books of the firm on the date of the succession;

(c) the partners of the firm do not receive any consideration or benefit, directly or indirectly, in any form or manner, other than by way of allotment of shares in the company; and

(d) the aggregate of the shareholding in the company of the partners of the firm is not less than fifty per cent of the total voting power in the company and their shareholding continues to be as such for a period of five years from the date of the succession;

(e) the demutualisation or corporatisation of a recognised stock exchange in India is carried out in accordance with a scheme for demutualisation or corporatisation which is approved by the Securities and Exchange Board of India established under section 3 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);

(xiiia) any transfer of a capital asset being a membership right held by a member of a recognised stock exchange in India for acquisition of shares and trading or clearing rights acquired by such member in that recognised stock exchange in accordance with a scheme for demutualisation or corporatisation which is approved by the Securities and Exchange Board of India established under section 3 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);

(xiiib) any transfer of a capital asset or intangible asset by a private company or unlisted public company (hereafter in this clause referred to as the company) to a limited liability partnership or any transfer of a share or shares held in the company by a shareholder as a result of conversion of the company into a limited liability partnership in accordance with the provisions of section 56 or section 57 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009):

Provided that—

(a) all the assets and liabilities of the company immediately before the conversion become the assets and liabilities of the limited liability partnership;

(b) all the shareholders of the company immediately before the conversion become the partners of the limited liability partnership and their capital contribution and profit sharing ratio in the limited liability partnership are in the same proportion as their shareholding in the company on the date of conversion;

(c) the shareholders of the company do not receive any consideration or benefit, directly or indirectly, in any form or manner, other than by way of share in profit and capital contribution in the limited liability partnership;

(d) the aggregate of the profit sharing ratio of the shareholders of the company in the limited liability partnership shall not be less than fifty per cent at any time during the period of five years from the date of conversion;

(e) the total sales, turnover or gross receipts in the business of the company in any of the three previous years preceding the previous year in which the conversion takes place does not exceed sixty lakh rupees;

(ea) the total value of the assets as appearing in the books of account of the company in any of the three previous years preceding the previous year in which the conversion takes place does not exceed five crore rupees; and

(f) no amount is paid, either directly or indirectly, to any partner out of balance of accumulated profit standing in the accounts of the company on the date of conversion for a period of three years from the date of conversion.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the expressions "private company" and "unlisted public company" shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009);

(xiv) where a sole proprietary concern is succeeded by a company in the business carried on by it as a result of which the sole proprietary concern sells or otherwise transfers any capital asset or intangible asset to the company:

Provided that—

(a) all the assets and liabilities of the sole proprietary concern relating to the business immediately before the succession become the assets and liabilities of the company;

(b) the shareholding of the sole proprietor in the company is not less than fifty per cent of the total voting power in the company and his shareholding continues to remain as such for a period of five years from the date of the succession; and

(c) the sole proprietor does not receive any consideration or benefit, directly or indirectly, in any form or manner, other than by way of allotment of shares in the company;

(xv) any transfer in a scheme for lending of any securities under an agreement or arrangement, which the assessee has entered into with the borrower of such securities and which is subject to the guidelines issued by the Securities and Exchange Board of India, established under section 3 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) or the Reserve Bank of India constituted under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), in this regard;

(xvi) any transfer of a capital asset in a transaction of reverse mortgage under a scheme made and notified by the Central Government;

(xvii) any transfer of a capital asset, being share of a special purpose vehicle to a business trust in exchange of units allotted by that trust to the transferor.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the expression "special purpose vehicle" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Explanation to clause (23FC) of section 10;

(xviii) any transfer by a unit holder of a capital asset, being a unit or units, held by him in the consolidating scheme of a mutual fund, made in consideration of the allotment to him of a capital asset, being a unit or units, in the consolidated scheme of the mutual fund:

Provided that the consolidation is of two or more schemes of equity oriented fund or of two or more schemes of a fund other than equity oriented fund.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—

(a) "consolidated scheme" means the scheme with which the consolidating scheme merges or which is formed as a result of such merger;

(b) "consolidating scheme" means the scheme of a mutual fund which merges under the process of consolidation of the schemes of mutual fund in accordance with the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996 made under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);

(c) "equity oriented fund" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (38)of section 10;

(d) "mutual fund" means a mutual fund specified under clause (23D)of section 10;

(xix) any transfer by a unit holder of a capital asset, being a unit or units, held by him in the consolidating plan of a mutual fund scheme, made in consideration of the allotment to him of a capital asset, being a unit or units, in the consolidated plan of that scheme of the mutual fund.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—

(a) "consolidating plan" means the plan within a scheme of a mutual fund which merges under the process of consolidation of the plans within a scheme of mutual fund in accordance with the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996 made under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);

(b) "consolidated plan" means the plan with which the consolidating plan merges or which is formed as a result of such merger;

(c) "mutual fund" means a mutual fund specified under clause (23D) of section 10;

(xx) any transfer of a capital asset, being an interest in a joint venture, held by a public sector company, in exchange of shares of a company incorporated outside India by the Government of a foreign State, in accordance with the laws of that foreign State.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, "joint venture" shall mean a business entity, as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette.


illustration:M held 2000 shares in a company ABC Ltd. This company amalgamated with another company during the previous year ending 31-3-2024. Under the scheme of amalgamation, M was allotted 1000 shares in the new company. The market value of shares allotted is higher by Rs 50,000 than the value of holding in ABC Ltd. The Assessing Officer proposes to treat the transaction as an exchange and to tax ` 50,000 as capital gain. Is he justified?
Answer- In the above example, assuming that the amalgamated company is an Indian company, the transaction is squarely covered by the exemption under section 47(vii) and the proposal of the Assessing Officer to treat the transaction as an exchange is not justified.


Transfer of capital asset or intangible asset on succession of the firm by a company or by AOP/ BOI to company consequent to demutualisation or corporatisation of a recognised stock exchange [Section 47(xiii)]: 
Any transfer of a capital asset or intangible asset (in the case of a firm) –
(i)by a firm to a company where such firm is succeeded by that company; or
(ii)to a company in the course of demutualisation or corporatisation of a recognised stock exchange in India as a result of which an AOP or BOI is succeeded by that company.
Conditions –
(a)All assets and liabilities of the firm or AOP or BOI relating to the business immediately before the succession become the assets and liabilities of the company;
(b)All the partners of the firm immediately before the succession become the shareholders of the company in the same the proportion in which their capital accounts stood in the books of the firm on the date of succession;
(c)The partners of the firm do not receive any consideration or benefit in any form, directly or indirectly, other than by way of allotment of shares in the company;
(d)The partners of the firm together hold not less than 50% of the total voting power in the company, and their shareholding continues in such manner for a period of 5 years from the date of succession;
(e)The demutualisation or corporatisation of a recognised stock exchange in India is carried out in accordance with a scheme for demutualisation or corporatisation approved by SEBI.
Transfer of capital asset or intangible asset by private company and share held by shareholder to LLP in a conversion of private company into a LLP [Section 47(xiiib)]:
(f)Any transfer of a capital asset or intangible asset by a private company or unlisted public company to a LLP or
(g)Any transfer of a share or shares held in a company by a shareholder on conversion of a company into a LLP
in accordance with section 56 and section 57 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008.
 
Conditions –
(i)All assets and liabilities of the company immediately before the conversion become the assets and liabilities of the LLP;
(ii)all the shareholders of the company immediately before the conversion become partners of the LLP and their capital contribution and profit sharing ratio in the LLP are in the same proportion as their shareholding in the company on the date of conversion;
(iii)No consideration other than share in profit and capital contribution in the LLP arises to the shareholders;
(iv)The erstwhile shareholders of the company continue to be entitled to receive at least 50% of the profits of the LLP for a period of 5 years from the date of conversion;
(v)The total sales, turnover or gross receipts in business of the company should not exceed Rs 60 lakh in any of the three preceding previous years;
(vi)The total value of assets as appearing in the books of account of the company in any of the three previous years preceding the previous year in which the conversion takes place, should not exceed Rs 5 crore; and
(vii)No amount is paid, either directly or indirectly, to any partner out of the accumulated profit of the company for a period of 3 years from the date of conversion.
Transfer of capital asset under Reverse Mortgage [Section 47(xvi)]: Any transfer of a capital asset in a transaction of reverse mortgage under a scheme made and notified by the Central Government. The Reverse Mortgage scheme is for the benefit of senior citizens, who own a residential house property. In order to supplement their existing income, they can mortgage their house property with a scheduled bank or housing finance company, in return for a lump-sum amount or for a regular monthly/ quarterly/ annual income. The senior citizens can continue to live in the house and receive regular income, without the botheration of having to pay back the loan. The loan will be given up to, say, 60% of the value of residential house property mortgaged. Also, the bank/housing finance company would undertake a revaluation of the property once every 5 years. The borrower can use the loan amount for renovation and extension of residential property, family’s medical and emergency expenditure etc., amongst others. However, he cannot use the amount for speculative or trading purposes.
 
The Reverse Mortgage Scheme, 2008, includes within its scope, disbursement of loan by an approved lending institution, in part or in full, to the annuity sourcing institu tion, for the purposes of periodic payments by way of annuity to the reverse mortgagor. This would be an additional mode of disbursement i.e., in addition to direct disbursements by the approved lending institution to the Reverse Mortgagor by way of periodic payments or lump sum payment in one or more tranches. An annuity sourcing institution has been defined to mean Life Insurance Corporation of India or any other insurer registered with the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority.

Maximum Period of Reverse Mortgage Loan:
-where the loan is disbursed directly to the Reverse Mortgagor and maximum period of loan is 20 years from the date of signing the agreement by the reverse mortgagor and the approved lending institution.
- Where the loan is disbursed, in part or in full, to the annuity sourcing institution for the purposes of periodic payments by way of annuity to the Reverse Mortgagor, the maximum period of loan is The residual life time of the borrower.

The bank will recover the loan along with the accumulated interest by selling the house after the death of the borrower. The excess amount will be given to the legal heirs. However, before resorting to sale of the house, preference will be given to the legal heirs to repay the loan an d interest and get the mortgaged property released.
Therefore, section 47(xvi) clarifies that any transfer of a capital asset in a transaction of reverse mortgage under a scheme made and notified by the Central Government would not amount to a transfer for the purpose of capital gains

Exemption of income received in a transaction of reverse mortgage [Section 10(43)]: Section 10(43), further, provides that the amount received by the senior citizen as a loan, either in lump sum or in instalments, in a transaction of reverse mortgage would be exempt from income-tax. Capital gains tax liability would be attracted only at the stage of alienation of the mortgaged property by the bank/ housing finance company for the purposes of recovering the loan.

Illustration:In which of the following situations capital gains tax liability does not arise?
(i)Mr. A purchased gold in 1970 for ` 25,000. In the P.Y. 2023-24, he gifted it to his son at the time of marriage. Fair market value (FMV) of the gold on the day the gift was made was
Rs 1,00,000. - We know that capital gains arise only when we transfer a capital asset. The liability of capital gains tax in the situations given above is discussed as follows,As per the provisions of section 47(iii), transfer of a capital asset under a gift is not regarded as transfer for the purpose of capital gains. Therefore, capital gains tax liability does not arise in the given situation.
(ii)A house property is purchased by a Hindu undivided family in 1945 for Rs 20,000. It is given to one of the family members in the P.Y. 2023-24 at the time of partition of the family. FMV on the day of partition was Rs 12,00,000. -As per the provisions of section 47(i), transfer of a capital asset (being in kind) on the total or partial partition of Hindu undivided family is not regarded as transfer for the purpose of capital gains. Therefore, capital gains tax liability does not arise in the given situation.
(iii)Mr. B purchased 50 convertible debentures for ` 40,000 in 1995 which are converted into 500 shares worth ` 85,000 in November 2023 by the company.-As per the provisions of section 47(x), transfer by way of conversion of bonds or debentures, debenture stock or deposit certificates in any form of a company into shares or debentures of that company is not regarded as transfer for the purpose of capital gains. Therefore, capital gains tax liability does not arise in the given situation.


Illustration:Mr. Abhishek a senior citizen, mortgaged his residential house with a bank, under a notified reverse mortgage scheme. He was getting loan from bank in monthly installments. Mr. Abhishek did not repay the loan on maturity and hence gave possession of the house to the bank, to discharge his loan. How will the treatment of long-term capital gain be on such reverse mortgage transaction?
Answer:Section 47(xvi) provides that any transfer of a capital asset in a transaction of reverse mortgage under a scheme made and notified by the Central Government shall not be considered as a transfer for the purpose of capital gain.
Accordingly, the mortgaging of residential house with bank by Mr. Abhishek will not be regarded as a transfer. Therefore, no capital gain will be charged on such transaction.
Further, section 10(43) provides that the amount received by the senior citizen as a loan, either in lump sum or in instalment, in a transaction of reverse mortgage would be exempt from income -tax. Therefore, the monthly instalment amounts received by Mr. Abhishek would not be taxable. However, capital gains tax liability would be attracted at the stage of alienation of the mortgaged property by the bank for the purposes of recovering the loan.



WITHDRAWAL OF EXEMPTION IN CERTAIN CASES- 
Section 47A provides for withdrawal of the benefit of exemption given by section 47 in certain cases.
(1)Conditions for transfer of capital asset by holding to its wholly owned subsidiary and vice versa [Section 47(iv) or 47(v)]: As noted above, capital gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset by a company to its wholly owned subsidiary company is exempt from tax.
Similarly, capital gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset by the subsidiary company to its 100% holding company is also exempt from tax, provided under both circumstances the transferee is an Indian company.
Section 47A provides that the above exemption will be withdrawn if at any time before the expiry of 8 years from the date of transfer of a capital asset referred to above
-such capital asset is converted by the transferee company or is treated by it as stock-in-trade of its business; or
-the parent company or its nominees ceases to hold the whole of the share capital of the subsidiary company.
In the above two cases, the amount of capital gains exempt from tax by virtue of the provisions contained in section 47 will be deemed to be the income of the transferor company chargeable under the head ‘capital gains’ of the year in which such transfer took place.
 
(2)Transfer of membership of a recognised stock exchange for shares [Section 47(xi)]: Capital gains not charged to tax under clause (xi) of section 47 shall be deemed to be the income chargeable under the head “capital gains” of the previous year in which such transfer took place if the shares of the company received in exchange for transfer of membership in a recognised stock exchange, are transferred at any time before the expiry of 3 years from the date of such transfer.
(3)Transfer of capital asset or intangible asset on succession of firm/ sole proprietary concern by a company [Section 47(xiii) or 47(xiv)]: Where any of the conditions laid down in section 47(xiii) or (xvi), as the case may be, for succession of a firm or sole proprietary concern by a company are not complied with, the amount of profits or gains arising from the transfer of such capital asset or intangible asset shall be deemed to be the profits and gains chargeable to tax of the successor company for the previous year in which the conditions are not complied with.
(4)Transfer of capital asset or intangible asset by private company or unlisted public company and share held by shareholder to LLP in a conversion of private company or unlisted public company by a LLP [Section 47(xiiib)]: If subsequent to the conversion of a private company or unlisted company into an LLP, any of the conditions laid down in section 47(xiiib) are not complied with, the capital gains not charged under section 45 would be deemed to be chargeable to tax in the previous year in which the conditions are not complied with, in the hands of the LLP or the shareholder of the predecessor company, as the case may be.


SECTION 48:MODE	OF COMPUTATION OF CAPITAL GAINS 

(1)Computation of capital gains: The income chargeable under the head ‘capital gains’ shall be computed by deducting the following items from the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of the capital asset:
(i)Expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with such transfer like, brokerage, stamp duty, registration fee, legal expenses etc.
(ii)The cost of acquisition and cost of any improvement thereto.
However, the cost of acquisition of the asset or the cost of improvement thereto would not include the deductions claimed in respect of interest u/s 24(b) or under the provisions of Chapter VI-A.
Deduction from cost of acquisition of a unit of a business trust - The cost of acquisition of a unit of a business trust has to be reduced -
by any sum received by a unit holder from the business trust with respect to such unit, which is not in the nature of interest and dividend referred to in section 10(23FC) or rental income referred to in section 10(23FCA) and
which is not chargeable to tax in the hands of unit holders under section 56(2)(xii) and in the hands of business trust under section 115UA(2).
However, where transaction of transfer of a unit is not considered as transfer under section 47 and cost of acquisition of such unit is determined under section 49, sum received with respect to such unit before such transaction as well as after such transaction has to be reduced from the cost of acquisition.
(iii)in case of value of any money or capital asset received by a specified person from a specified entity referred to in section 45(4), the amount chargeable to income-tax as income of such specified entity under that section which is attributable to the capital asset being transferred by the specified entity , calculated in the prescribed manner [The manner of attribution is prescribed under Rule 8AB, which was discussed in earlier paras along with section 45(4)] .
(2)No deduction in respect of STT paid: No deduction, however, shall be allowed in computing the income chargeable under the head “Capital Gains” in respect of any amount paid on account of securities transaction tax under Chapter VII of the Finance (No.2) Act, 2004.
(3)Cost inflation index: As per second proviso to section 48, for computation of long term capital gains, the cost of acquisition and cost of improvement increased by applying the Cost Inflation Index (CII). Once the CII is applied to the cost of acquisition and cost of improvement, it becomes indexed cost of acquisition and indexed cost of improvement.
This means an amount which bears to the cost of acquisition, the same proportion as CII for the year in which the asset is transferred bears to the CII for the first year in which the asset was held by the assessee or for the year beginning on 1st April, 2001, whichever is later.
 
Similarly, indexed cost of any improvement means an amount which bears to the cost of improvement, the same proportion as CII for the year in which the asset is transferred bears to the CII for the year in which the improvement to the asset took place.

“Cost Inflation Index” in relation to a previous year means such index as may be notified by the Central Government having regard to 75% of average rise in the Consumer Price Index (Urban) for the immediately preceding previous year to such previous year.

note- The benefit of indexation will not apply to the long-term capital gains arising from the transfer of bonds or debentures other than –
(1)Capital indexed bonds issued by the Government; or
(2)Sovereign Gold Bond issued by the RBI under the Sovereign Gold Bond Scheme, 2015.
In case of depreciable assets, unit of a specified mutual fund and marked linked debenture (discussed later), there will be no indexation and the capital gains will always be short-term capital gains.

The cost inflation indices for the financial years so far have been notified as under:
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2001-02 is 100.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2002-03 is 105.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2003-04 is 109.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2004-05 is 113.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2005-06 is 117.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2006-07 is 122.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2007-08 is 129.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2008-09 is 137.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2009-10 is 148.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2010-11 is 167.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2011-12 is 184.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2012-13 is 200.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2013-14 is 220.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2014-15 is 240.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2015-16 is 254.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2016-17 is 264.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2017-18 is 272.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2018-19 is 280.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2019-20 is 289.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2020-21 is 301.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2021-22 is 317.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2022-23 is 331.
Financial Year	Cost Inflation Index of 2023-24 is 348.

(4)Full value of consideration of shares, debentures or warrants issued under ESOP in case of transfer under a gift etc. - In case where shares, debentures or warrants allotted by a company directly or indirectly to its employees under the Employees' Stock Option Plan or Scheme in accordance with the guidelines issued in this behalf by the Central Government are transferred under a gift or irrecoverable trust, then the market value on the date of such transfer shall be deemed to be the full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer of such asset.
(5)Special provision for non-residents - In case of non-residents who invest foreign exchange to acquire capital assets, capital gains arising from the transfer of shares or debentures of an Indian company is to be computed in the following manner:
•The cost of acquisition, the expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with the transfer and the full value of the consideration are to be converted into the same foreign currency with which such shares were acquired.
•The resulting capital gains shall be reconverted into Indian currency.

The aforesaid manner of computation of capital gains shall be applied for every purchase and sale of shares or debentures of an Indian company. Rule 115A is relevant for this pur- pose. Benefit of indexation will not be applied in this case.

Non-corporate non-residents and foreign companies to be subject to tax at a concessional rate of 10% (without indexation benefit or currency fluctuation) on long-term capital gains arising from transfer of unlisted securities or shares of a company in which public are not
substantially interested [Section 112]

Rupee Denominated Bonds (RDBs)- As a measure to enable Indian companies to raise funds from outside India, the RBI has permitted them to issue rupee denominated bonds outside India. Accordingly, in case of non-resident assessees, any gains arising on account of appreciation of rupee between the date of purchase and the date of redemption of rupee denominated bond of an Indian company held by him against foreign currency in which investment is made shall not be included in computation of full value of consideration. This would provide relief to the non- resident investor who bears the risk of currency fluctuation.
Note:The benefit of indexation and currency fluctuation would not be applicable to the long- term capital gains arising from the transfer of the following assets referred to in section 112A:
(i)equity share in a company on which STT is paid both at the time of acquisition and transfer
(ii)unit of equity oriented fund or unit of business trust on which STT is paid at the time of transfer.


Section 49: ASCERTAINMENT OF COST IN SPECIFIED CIRCUMSTANCES- A person becomes the owner of a capital asset not only by purchase but also by several other methods. Section 49 gives guidelines as to how to compute the cost under different circumstances.

(1) Where the capital asset became the property of the assessee—

(i) on any distribution of assets on the total or partial partition of a Hindu undivided family;

(ii) under a gift or will;

(iii) (a) by succession, inheritance or devolution, or

(b) on any distribution of assets on the dissolution of a firm, body of individuals, or other association of persons, where such dissolution had taken place at any time before the 1st day of April, 1987, or

(c) on any distribution of assets on the liquidation of a company, or

(d) under a transfer to a revocable or an irrevocable trust, or

(e) under any such transfer as is referred to in clause (iv) or clause (v) or clause (vi) or clause (via) or clause (viaa) or clause (viab) or clause (vib) or clause (vic) or clause (vica) or clause (vicb) or clause (vicc) or [clause (viiac) or clause (viiad) or clause (viiae) or clause (viiaf) or] clause (xiii) or clause (xiiib) or clause (xiv) of section 47;

(iv) such assessee being a Hindu undivided family, by the mode referred to in sub-section (2) of section 64 at any time after the 31st day of December, 1969,

the cost of acquisition of the asset shall be deemed to be the cost for which the previous owner of the property acquired it, as increased by the cost of any improvement of the assets incurred or borne by the previous owner or the assessee, as the case may be.

Explanation.—In this sub-section the expression "previous owner of the property" in relation to any capital asset owned by an assessee means the last previous owner of the capital asset who acquired it by a mode of acquisition other than that referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) or clause (iii) or clause (iv) of this sub-section.

(2) Where the capital asset being a share or shares in an amalgamated company which is an Indian company became the property of the assessee in consideration of a transfer referred to in clause (vii) of section 47, the cost of acquisition of the asset shall be deemed to be the cost of acquisition to him of the share or shares in the amalgamating company.

(2A) Where the capital asset, being a share or debenture of a company, became the property of the assessee in consideration of a transfer referred to in clause (x) or clause (xa) of section 47, the cost of acquisition of the asset to the assessee shall be deemed to be that part of the cost of debenture, debenture-stock, bond or deposit certificate in relation to which such asset is acquired by the assessee.

(2AA) Where the capital gain arises from the transfer of specified security or sweat equity shares referred to in sub-clause (vi) of clause (2) of section 17, the cost of acquisition of such security or shares shall be the fair market value which has been taken into account for the purposes of the said sub-clause.

(2AAA) Where the capital asset, being rights of a partner referred to in section 42 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009), became the property of the assessee on conversion as referred to in clause (xiiib) of section 47, the cost of acquisition of the asset shall be deemed to be the cost of acquisition to him of the share or shares in the company immediately before its conversion.

(2AB) Where the capital gain arises from the transfer of specified security or sweat equity shares, the cost of acquisition of such security or shares shall be the fair market value which has been taken into account while computing the value of fringe benefits under clause (ba) of sub-section (1) of section 115WC.

(2ABB) Where the capital asset, being share or shares of a company, is acquired by a non-resident assessee on redemption of Global Depository Receipts referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 115AC held by such assessee, the cost of acquisition of the share or shares shall be the price of such share or shares prevailing on any recognised stock exchange on the date on which a request for such redemption was made.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "recognised stock exchange" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (ii) of the Explanation 1 to sub-section (5) of section 43.

(2AC) Where the capital asset, being a unit of a business trust, became the property of the assessee in consideration of a transfer as referred to in clause (xvii) of section 47, the cost of acquisition of the asset shall be deemed to be the cost of acquisition to him of the share referred to in the said clause.

(2AD)Where the capital asset, being a unit or units in a consolidated scheme of a mutual fund, became the property of the assessee in consideration of a transfer referred to in clause (xviii)of section 47, the cost of acquisition of the asset shall be deemed to be the cost of acquisition to him of the unit or units in the consolidating scheme of the mutual fund.

(2AE) Where the capital asset, being equity share of a company, became the property of the assessee in consideration of a transfer referred to in clause (xb) of section 47, the cost of acquisition of the asset shall be deemed to be that part of the cost of the preference share in relation to which such asset is acquired by the assessee.

(2AF) Where the capital asset, being a unit or units in a consolidated plan of a mutual fund scheme, became the property of the assessee in consideration of a transfer referred to in clause (xix) of section 47, the cost of acquisition of the asset shall be deemed to be the cost of acquisition to him of the unit or units in the consolidating plan of the scheme of the mutual fund.

(2AG) The cost of acquisition of a unit or units in the segregated portfolio shall be the amount which bears, to the cost of acquisition of a unit or units held by the assessee in the total portfolio, the same proportion as the net asset value of the asset transferred to the segregated portfolio bears to the net asset value of the total portfolio immediately before the segregation of portfolios.

(2AH) The cost of the acquisition of the original units held by the unit holder in the main portfolio shall be deemed to have been reduced by the amount as so arrived at under sub-section (2AG).

Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section (2AG) and sub-section (2AH), the expressions "main portfolio", "segregated portfolio" and "total portfolio" shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the circular No. SEBI/HO/IMD/DF2/CIR/P/2018/160, dated the 28th December, 2018, issued by the Securities and Exchange Board of India under section 11 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992).

(2AI) Where the capital asset, being shares as referred to in clause (xx) of section 47, became the property of the assessee, the cost of acquisition of such asset shall be deemed to be the cost of acquisition to it of the interest in the joint venture referred to in the said clause.

(2B) [***]

(2C) The cost of acquisition of the shares in the resulting company shall be the amount which bears to the cost of acquisition of shares held by the assessee in the demerged company the same proportion as the net book value of the assets transferred in a demerger bears to the net worth of the demerged company immediately before such demerger.

(2D) The cost of acquisition of the original shares held by the shareholder in the demerged company shall be deemed to have been reduced by the amount as so arrived at under sub-section (2C).

(2E) The provisions of sub-section (2), sub-section (2C) and sub-section (2D) shall, as far as may be, also apply in relation to business reorganisation of a co-operative bank as referred to in section 44DB.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "net worth" shall mean the aggregate of the paid up share capital and general reserves as appearing in the books of account of the demerged company immediately before the demerger.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where the capital gain arising from the transfer of a capital asset referred to in clause (iv) or, as the case may be, clause (v) of section 47 is deemed to be income chargeable under the head "Capital gains" by virtue of the provisions contained in section 47A, the cost of acquisition of such asset to the transferee-company shall be the cost for which such asset was acquired by it.

(4) Where the capital gain arises from the transfer of a property, the value of which has been subject to income-tax under clause (vii) or clause (viia) or clause (x) of sub-section (2) of section 56, the cost of acquisition of such property shall be deemed to be the value which has been taken into account for the purposes of the said clause (vii) or clause (viia) or clause (x).

(5) Where the capital gain arises from the transfer of an asset declared under the Income Declaration Scheme, 2016, and the tax, surcharge and penalty have been paid in accordance with the provisions of the Scheme on the fair market value of the asset as on the date of commencement of the Scheme, the cost of acquisition of the asset shall be deemed to be the fair market value of the asset which has been taken into account for the purposes of the said Scheme.

(6) Where the capital gain arises from the transfer of a specified capital asset referred to in clause (c) of the Explanation to clause (37A) of section 10, which has been transferred after the expiry of two years from the end of the financial year in which the possession of such asset was handed over to the assessee, the cost of acquisition of such specified capital asset shall be deemed to be its stamp duty value as on the last day of the second financial year after the end of the financial year in which the possession of the said specified capital asset was handed over to the assessee.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "stamp duty value" means the value adopted or assessed or assessable by any authority of the State Government for the purpose of payment of stamp duty in respect of an immovable property.

(7) Where the capital gain arises from the transfer of a capital asset, being share in the project, in the form of land or building or both, referred to in sub-section (5A) of section 45, not being the capital asset referred to in the proviso to the said sub-section, the cost of acquisition of such asset, shall be the amount which is deemed as full value of consideration in that sub-section.

(8) Where the capital gain arises from the transfer of an asset, being the asset held by a trust or an institution in respect of which accreted income has been computed and the tax has been paid thereon in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XII-EB, the cost of acquisition of such asset shall be deemed to be the fair market value of the asset which has been taken into account for computation of accreted income as on the specified date referred to in sub-section (2) of section 115TD.

(9) Where the capital gain arises from the transfer of a capital asset referred to in clause (via) of section 28, the cost of acquisition of such asset shall be deemed to be the fair market value which has been taken into account for the purposes of the said clause.

Following sub-section (10) shall be inserted after sub-section (9) of section 49 by the Finance Act, 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024:

(10) Where the capital asset, being—

(i) an Electronic Gold Receipt issued by a Vault Manager, became the property of the person as consideration of a transfer, referred to in clause (viid) of section 47, the cost of acquisition of the asset for the purposes of the said transfer, shall be deemed to be the cost of gold in the hands of the person in whose name Electronic Gold Receipt is issued;

(ii) gold released against an Electronic Gold Receipt, which became the property of the person as consideration for a transfer, referred to in clause (viid) of section 47, the cost of acquisition of the asset for the purposes of the said transfer shall be deemed to be the cost of the Electronic Gold Receipt in the hands of such person.


Illustration: Neerja was carrying on the textile business under a proprietorship concern, Neerja Textiles. On 30.12.2023 the business of Neerja Textiles was succeeded by New Look Textile Private Limited and all the assets and liabilities of Neerja Textiles on that date became the assets and liabilities of New Look Textile Private Limited and Neerja was given 52% share in the share capital of the company. No other consideration was given to Neerja on account of this succession.
The assets and liabilities of Neerja Textiles transferred to the company include an urban land which was acquired by Neerja on 19.7.2013 for ` 9,80,000. The company sold the same on 30.03.2024 for ` 16,00,000.Examine the tax implication of the above-mentioned transaction and compute the income chargeable to tax in such case(s).
Cost Inflation Index: F.Y. 2013-14: 220; F.Y. 2023-24: 348.
Answer: 
-Taxability in case of succession of Neerja Textiles by New Look Textile Private Limited
As per provisions of section 47(xiv), in case a proprietorship concern is succeeded by a company in the business carried by it and as a result of which any capital asset or intangible asset is transferred to the company, then the same shall not be treated as transfer and will not be chargeable to capital gain tax in case the following conditions are satisfied:
(1)all the assets and liabilities of sole proprietary concern becomes the assets and liabilities of the company.
(2)the shareholding of the sole proprietor in the company is not less than 50% of the total voting power of the company and continues to remain as such for a period of 5 years from the date of succession.
(3)the sole proprietor does not receive any consideration or benefit in any form from the company other than by way of allotment of shares in the company.
In the present case, all the conditions mentioned above are satisfied therefore, the transfer of capital asset by Neerja Textiles to New Look Textile Private Limited shall not attract capital gain tax provided Neerja continues to hold 50% or more of voting power of New Look Textiles Private Limited for a minimum period of 5 years.
-Taxability in case of transfer of land by New Look Textile Private Limited
As per the provisions of section 49(1) and Explanation 1 to section 2(42A), in case a capital asset is transferred in the circumstances mentioned in section 47(xiv), the cost of the asset in the hands of the company shall be the cost of the asset in the hands of the sole proprietor. Consequently, for the determining the period of holding of the asset, the period for which the asset is held by the sole proprietor shall also be considered.

Therefore, in the present case, the urban land shall be a long-term capital asset since it is held for more than 24 months by New Look Textile Private Limited and Neerja Textiles taken together. Cost of acquisition of land in the hands of the company shall be Rs 9,80,000 i.e., the purchase cost of the land in the hands of Neerja.

Computation of capital gain chargeable to tax in the hands of New Look Textile Private Ltd.
Net Sale Consideration [16,00,000] (-)Indexed cost of acquisition[9,80,000] = Long-term Capital gain[6,20,000]
Note: The year of transfer and the year in which the company first held the asset are the same in this case, which is the reason why the numerator and the denominator for calculating the indexed cost of acquisition would remain the same. Therefore, in effect, there is no benefit of indexation in this case. However, as per the view expressed by Bombay High Court in CIT v. Manjula J. Shah 16 Taxman 42, in case the cost of acquisition of the capital asset in the hands of the assessee is taken to be cost of such asset in the hands of the previous owner, the indexation benefit would be available from the year in which the capital asset is acquired by the previous owner. If this view is considered, the indexed cost of acquisition would have to be calculated by taking the CII of F.Y.2013-14 i.e., 220, being the year in which the capital asset was acquired by the previous owner, Neerja, as the denominator, in which case, the capital gains chargeable to tax would undergo a change. The long-term capital gains in such a case would be Rs 49,818 [Rs 16,00,000 - Rs 15,50,182 (Rs 9,80,000 x  348/220)].



Section 55(2):COST OF ACQUISITION: Cost of acquisition is the price that the assessee has paid, or the amount that the assessee has incurred, for acquisition of the asset. Expenses incurred for completing the title are a part of the cost of acquisition. For eg: Stamp duty.
(1)Goodwill of a business or profession or a trademark or brand name associated with a business or profession or any other intangible or a right to manufacture, produce or process any article or thing, or right to carry on any business or profession, tenancy rights, stage carriage permits and loom hours,or any other rights.
(i)In case of acquisition from previous owner: In the case of the above capital assets, if the assessee has purchased them from a previous owner, the cost of acquisition means the amount of the purchase price.Example: If A purchases a stage carriage permit from B for Rs 2 lakhs, Rs 2 lakhs will be the cost of acquisition for A. However, in case of a capital asset, being goodwill of a business or profession, in respect of which depreciation under section 32(1) has been obtained by the assessee in any previous year (upto P.Y.2019-20), the cost of acquisition of such goodwill would be the amount of the purchase price as reduced by the total amount of depreciation (upto P.Y.2019-20) obtained by the assessee under section 32(1).

(ii)In case of circumstances mentioned under section 49(1)(i)/(ii)/(iii)/(iv) : In cases where the capital asset became the property of the assessee by any of the following modes from the previous owner, and such capital assets were acquired by the previous owner by purchase, cost of acquisition to the assessee will be the amount of the purchase price for such previous owner:-
(1)On any distribution of assets on the total or partial partition of a Hindu undivided family.
(2)Under a gift or will.
(3)By succession, inheritance or devolution.
(4)On any distribution of assets on the liquidation of a company.
(5)Under a transfer to a revocable or an irrevocable trust.
(6)Under any transfer of a capital asset referred to in section 47(iv)/(v)/(vi)/(via)/ (via)/(viaa)/(viab)/(vib)/(vic)/(vica)/(vicb)/(vicc)/(viiac)/(viiad)/(viiae)/(viiaf)/(xiii)/   (xiiib)/(xiv)
(7)Where the assessee is a Hindu undivided family, by the mode referred to in section 64(2) i.e., conversion of self-acquired property of a member of a HUF into the property of the HUF .
However, in case of a capital asset, being goodwill of a business or profession, in respect of which depreciation under section 32(1) has been obtained by the assessee in any previous year (upto P.Y.2019-20), the cost of acquisition of such goodwill would be the amount of the purchase price for such previous owner as reduced by the total amount of depreciation (upto P.Y.2019-20) obtained by the assessee under section 32(1).

(iii)In any other case [i.e., in case of self-generated assets]: In case of self-generated assets namely, goodwill of a business or profession or a trademark or brand name associated with a business or profession or any other intangible asset or a right to manufacture, produce or process any article or thing, or right to carry on any business or profession, tenancy rights, stage carriage permits, or loom hours, or any other right, the cost of acquisition will be taken to be Nil.


(2)Financial assets - Many a time, persons who own shares or other securities become entitled to subscribe to any additional shares or securities. Further, they are also allotted additional shares or securities without any payment. Such shares or securities are referred to as financial assets in Income-tax Act. Section 55 provides the basis for ascertaining the cost of acquisition of such financial assets.
(i)Original shares (which form the basis of entitlement of rights shares): In relation to the original financial asset on the basis of which the assessee becomes entitled to any additional financial assets, cost of acquisition means the amount actually paid for acquiring the original financial assets.
(ii)Rights entitlement (which is renounced by the assessee in favour of a person): In relation to any right to renounce the said entitlement to subscribe to the financial asset, when such a right is renounced by the assessee in favour of any person, cost of acquisition shall be taken to be nil in the case of such assessee.
(iii)Rights shares acquired by the assessee: In relation to the financial asset, to which the assessee has subscribed on the basis of the said entitlement, cost of acquisition means the amount actually paid by him for acquiring such asset.
(iv)Rights shares which are purchased by the person in whose favour the assessee has renounced the rights entitlement: In the case of any financial asset purchased by the person in whose favour the right to subscribe to such assets has been renounced, cost of acquisition means the aggregate of the amount of the purchase price paid by him to the person renouncing such right and the amount paid by him to the company or institution for acquiring such financial asset.
(v)Bonus Shares: In relation to the financial asset allotted to the assessee without any payment and on the basis of holding of any other financial assets, cost of acquisition shall be taken to be nil in the case of such assessee.
 
In other words, where bonus shares are allotted without any payment on the basis of holding of original shares, the cost of such bonus shares wil l be nil in the hands of the original shareholder.
Bonus shares allotted before 01.04.2001: However, in respect of bonus shares allotted before 1.4.2001, although the cost of acquisition of the shares is nil, the assessee may opt for the fair market value as on 1.4.2001 as the cost of acquisition of such bonus shares.
Bonus shares allotted before 1.2.2018, on which STT has been paid at the time of transfer – In case of transfer of bonus shares allotted before 1.2.2018 on which STT has been paid at the time of transfer, the cost would be the higher of –
(i)Actual cost of acquisition (i.e., Nil, in case of bonus shares allotted on or after 1.4.2001; and FMV on 1.4.2001, in case of business shares allotted before 1.4.2001)
(ii)Lower of –
(a)FMV as on 31.1.2018; and
(b)Actual sale consideration

(3)Equity shares received on demutualisation or corporatisation of a recognised stock exchange – In relation to equity shares allotted to a shareholder of a recognised stock exchange in India under a scheme for demutualisation or corporatisation approved by SEBI, the cost of acquisition of such shares shall be the cost of acquiring his original membership of the exchange.

(4)Clearing or trading right acquired on demutualisation or corporatisation of a recognised stock exchange – The cost of a capital asset, being trading or clearing rights of a recognised stock exchange acquired by a shareholder (who has been allotted equity share or shares under such scheme of demutualisation or corporatisation), shall be deemed to be nil.

(5)Long-term capital assets referred to in section 112A:The cost of acquisition in relation to the long-term capital assets being,
equity shares in a company on which STT is paid both at the time of purchase and transfer or
unit of equity oriented fund or unit of business trust on which STT is paid at the time of transfer.
 acquired before 1st February, 2018 shall be the higher of
(i)cost of acquisition of such asset; and
(ii)lower of the fair market value of such asset; and the full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of the capital asset.


Meaning of Fair Market Value:
-In a case where the capital asset is listed on any recognised stock exchange as on 31.01.2018 = the fair maket value, If there is trading in such asset on such exchange on 31.01.2018, The highest price of the capital asset quoted on such exchange on the said date.If there is no trading in such asset on such exchange on 31.01.2018,fair market value will be The highest price of such asset on such exchange on a date immediately preceding 31.01.2018 when such asset was traded on such exchange.

-In a case where the capital asset is a unit which is not listed on any recognised stock exchange as on 31.01.2018 = The fair market value will be The net asset value of such unit as on the said date.

-In a case where the capital asset is an equity share in a company which is not listed on a recognised	stock exchange as on 31.01.2018 but listed on such exchange on the date of transfer= The fair market value will be an An amount which bears to the cost of acquisition the same proportion as CII for the financial year 2017-18 bears to the CII for the first year in which the asset was held by the assessee or on 01.04.2001, whichever is later.

-In a case where the capital asset is an equity share in a company which is listed on a recognised stock exchange on the date of transfer and which became the property of the assessee in consideration of share which is not listed on such exchange as on 31.01.2018 by way of transaction not regarded as transfer under section 47 = the Fair market value will be an amount which bears to the cost of acquisition the same proportion as CII for the financial year 2017-18 bears to the CII for the first year in which the asset was held by the assessee or on 01.04.2001, whichever is later.



(6)Any other capital asset–
(i)Where the capital asset become the property of the assessee before 1 -4-2001, cost of acquisition means the cost of acquisition of the asset to the assessee or the fair market value of the asset on 1-4-2001 at the option of the assessee. However, in case of capital asset, being land or building or both, the fair market value of such asset on 1-4-2001 shall not exceed the stamp duty value, wherever available, of such asset as on 1-4-2001.
(ii)Where the capital asset became the property of the assessee by any of the modes specified in section 49(1): The cost of acquisition to the assessee will be the cost of acquisition to the previous owner. Even in such cases, where the capital asset became the property of the previous owner before 1-4-2001, the assessee has got a right to opt for the fair market value as on 1-4-2001. However, in case of capital asset, being land or building or both, the fair market value of such asset on 1-4-2001 shall not exceed the stamp duty value, wherever available, of such asset as on 1-4-2001.Note:The provisions contained in (i) & (ii) of (6) above shall also apply to the financial assets mentioned in (i) to (v) of (2) and long term capital assets referred to in section 112A of (5) above.

(iii)Where the capital asset became the property of the assessee on the distribution of the capital assets of a company on its liquidation and the assessee has been assessed to capital gains in respect of that asset under section 46, the cost of acquisition means the fair market value of the asset on the date of distribution.

(iv)A share or a stock of a company may become the property of an assessee under the following circumstances:
(a)the consolidation and division of all or any of the share capital of the company into shares of larger amount than its existing shares.
(b)the conversion of any shares of the company into stock,
(c)the re-conversion of any stock of the company into shares,
(d)the sub-division of any of the shares of the company into shares of smaller amount, or
(e)the conversion of one kind of shares of the company into another kind.
In the above circumstances the cost of acquisition to the assessee will mean the cost of acquisition of the asset calculated with reference to the cost of acquisition of the shares or stock from which such asset is derived.

(7)Where the cost for which the previous owner acquired the property cannot be ascertained, the cost of acquisition to the previous owner means the fair market value on the date on which the capital asset became the property of the previous owner.


SUMMARISATION: COST OF ACQUISITION- 
1)Goodwill of business or profession, trademark, brand name or any other intangible asset etc - 
-Self generated = Cost of acquisition will be "NIL"
-Acquired from previous owner= cost of acquisition will be "Purchase price"
-However, in case of capital asset, being goodwill of a business or profession, in respect of which depreciation u/s 32(1) has been obtained by the assessee in any P.Y. (upto P.Y.2019-20)= Cost of acquisition will be Purchase price as reduced by the total amount of depreciation obtained by the assessee under section 32(1).
-became the property of the assessee by way of distribution of assets on total or partial partition of HUF, under a gift or will, by succession, inheritance, distribution of assets on liquidation of a company, etc. and previous owner has acquired it by purchase = Cost of acquisition will be "Purchase price for such previous owner"
-However, in case of capital asset, being goodwill of a business or profession which was acquired by the previous owner by purchase and in respect of which depreciation u/s 32(1) has been obtained by the assessee in any P.Y. (upto P.Y.2019-20) = Cost of acquisition will be Purchase price for such previous owner as reduced by the total amount of depreciation obtained by the assessee u/s 32(1).

2)Bonus Shares-
-Allotted before 1.4.2001= Cost of acquisition will be FMV as on 1.4.2001
-Allotted on or after 1.4.2001 = Cost of acquisition will be "NIL"
-Bonus shares allotted before 1.2.2018, on which STT has been paid at the time of transfer = Cost of Acquisition will be higher of 
      (i)Actual cost of acquisition (i.e., Nil, in case of bonus shares allotted on or after 1.4.2001; and FMV on 1.4.2001, in case of bonus shares allotted before 1.4.2001) 
      (ii)Lower of - 
          (a)FMV as on 31.1.2018; and
          (b)Actual sale consideration

3)Rights Shares-
-Original shares (which form the basis of entitlement of rights shares) = Cost of acquisition will be "Amount actually paid for acquiring the original shares"
-Rights entitlement (which is renounced by the assessee in favour of a person) = Cost of acquisition will be "NIL"
-Rights shares acquired by the assessee = Cost of acquisition will be "Amount actually paid for acquiring the rights shares"
-Rights shares which are purchased by the person in whose favour the assessee has renounced the rights entitlement = Cost of acquisition will be Purchase price paid to the renouncer of rights entitlement as well as the amount paid to the company which has allotted the rights shares.

4)Equity shares received on demutualisation or corporatisation of a recognised stock exchange = Cost of acquisition of such shares shall be the cost of acquiring his original membership of the exchange.

5)Clearing or trading right acquired on demutualisation or corporatisation of a recognised stock exchange = Cost of acquisition will be "NIL"

6)Long term capital assets being, equity shares in a company on which STT is paid both at the time of purchase and transfer or unit of equity oriented fund or unit of business trust on which STT is paid at the time of transfer, acquired before 1st February, 2018 = the cost of acquisition will be higher of
     (i)cost of acquisition of such asset; and
     (ii)lower of-
         (a)the fair market value of such asset; and
         (b)the full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of the capital asset.

7)Any other capital asset, Where such capital asset became the property of the assessee before 1.4.2001 = Cost of the asset to the assessee, or FMV as on 1.4.2001, at the option of the assessee. However, in case of capital asset being land or building, FMV as on 1.4.2001 shall not exceed stamp duty value as on 1.4.2001.

8)Where capital assets became the property of the assessee by way of distribution of assets on total or partial partition of HUF, under a gift or will, by succession, inheritance, distribution of assets on liquidation of a company, etc. and the capital asset became the property of the previous owner before 1.4.2001 = The cost of acquisition will be Cost to the previous owner or FMV as on 1.4.2001, at the option of the assessee. However, in case of capital asset being land or building, FMV as on 1.4.2001 shall not exceed stamp duty value as on 1.4.2001.

9)Where cost of the property in the hands of previous owner cannot be ascertained = the Cost of acquisition will be The FMV on the date on which the capital asset become the property of the previous owner would be considered as cost of acquisition.

Section 55(1):COST OF IMPROVEMENT- 
(1)Goodwill or any other intangibles of a business, etc. [Section 55(1)(b)(1)]:In relation to a capital asset being goodwill or any other intangibles of a business or right to manufacture, produce or process any article or thing, or right to carry on any business or profession or any other right, the cost of improvement shall be taken to be "NIL".

(2)Any other capital asset [Section 55(1)(b)(2)]:
(i)Where the capital asset became the property of the previous owner or the assessee before 1.4.2001:
(a)In a case covered u/s 49(1), where the capital asset became the property of the previous owner and the assessee before 1.4.2001 - Cost of Improvement will be All expenditure of a capital nature incurred in making any addition or alteration to the capital asset on or after 1.4.2001 by the assessee.
(b)In a case covered u/s 49(1), where the capital asset became the property of the previous owner before 1.4.2001 but became the property of the assessee on or after 1.4.2001-Cost of improvement will be All expenditure of a capital nature incurred in making any addition or alteration to the capital asset on or after 1.4.2001 by the previous owner and the assessee.

(c)In a case not covered u/s 49(1) - Cost of improvement will be All expenditure of a capital nature incurred in making any addition or alteration to the capital asset on or after 1.4.2001 by the assessee.

(ii)Where the capital asset became the property of the previous owner and the assessee on or after 1.4.2001
(a)In a case covered u/s 49(1) - Cost of Improvement will be All expenditure of a capital nature incurred in making any addition or alteration to the capital asset by the previous owner and the assessee.
(b)In a case not covered u/s 49(1) - Cost of improvement will be All expenditure of a capital nature incurred in making any addition or alteration to the capital asset by the assessee after it became the assessee’s property.

In a nutshell, in a case covered under section 49(1), cost of improvement would include expenditure of a capital nature on addition or alteration to the capital asset by the previous owner or the assessee or both on or after 1.4.2001. In a case not covered under section 49(1), cost of improvement would include expenditure of a capital nature on addition or alteration to the capital asset by the assessee on or after 1.4.2001.
However, cost of improvement does not include any expenditure which is deductible in computing the income chargeable under the head “Income from house property”, “Profits and gains of business or profession” or “Income from other sources”. Routine expenses on repairs and maintenance do not form part of cost of improvement.



SECTION 50 & 50A: COMPUTATION OF CAPITAL GAINS IN CASE OF DEPRECIABLE ASSETS 
(1)Transfer of depreciable assets [Section 50]: Section 50 provides for the computation of capital gains in case of depreciable assets. It may be noted that where the capital asset is a depreciable asset forming part of a block of assets, section 50 will have overriding effect in spite of anything contained in section 2(42A) which defines a short-term capital asset.
Accordingly, where the capital asset is an asset forming part of a block of assets in respect of which depreciation has been allowed, the provisions of sections 48 and 49 shall be subject to the following modifications:
•Where the full value of consideration received or accruing for the transfer of the asset plus the full value of such consideration for the transfer of any other capital asset falling with the block of assets during previous year exceeds the aggregate of the following amounts namely:
(a)expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with such transfer(s);
(b)WDV of the block of assets at the beginning of the previous year;
(c)the actual cost of any asset falling within the block of assets acquired during t he previous year
such excess shall be deemed to be the capital gains arising from the transfer of short-term capital assets.
•Where all assets in a block are transferred during the previous year, the block itself will cease to exist. In such a situation, the difference between the sale value of the assets and the WDV of the block of assets at the beginning of the previous year together with the actual cost of any asset falling within that block of assets acquired by the assessee during the previous year will be deemed to be the capital gains arising from the transfer of short- term capital assets.

To summarise the transfer of depreciable asset and its tax consequences, we can understand it in following cases- 
- If Full value of consideration exceed block of assets(Opening WDV of Block (+) Actual Cost of Asset acquired in the Block during the P.Y. (+) Expenses in connection with transfer of asset), then difference between full value of consideration and existing block of asset will be Short term capital Gain.
-If Full value of consideration is less than block of assets(Opening WDV of Block (+) Actual Cost of Asset acquired in the Block during the P.Y. (+) Expenses in connection with transfer of asset), if the Block ceast to exist, then difference between Full value of consideration and  block of assets will be short-term capital loss. If the block doesn't seem to exist, then difference between Full value of consideration and  block of assets will be the Closing WDV of the block for computing depreciation.


(2)Transfer of power sector assets [Section 50A]: With respect to the power sector, in case of depreciable assets referred to in section 32(1)(i), the provisions of sections 48 and 49 shall apply subject to the modification that the WDV of the asset [as defined in section 43(6)], as adjusted, shall be taken to be the cost of acquisition.


SECTION 50AA:COMPUTATION OF CAPITAL GAINS IN CASE OF MARKET LINKED DEBENTURES 
(1)Transfer of unit of a Specified Mutual Fund or Market Linked Debenture: Section 50AA provides for the computation of capital gains in case of transfer of unit(s) of
-a Specified Mutual Fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023 or
-a Market Linked Debenture.
Section 50AA will have an over-riding effect in spite of anything contained in section 2(42A) which defines a short-term capital asset.
Accordingly, capital gain arising from the transfer or redemption or maturity of unit of a Specified Mutual Fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023 or Market Linked Debenture would be deemed to be short term capital gains and chargeable to tax at normal rate of tax.
(2)Computation of capital gains: The full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer or redemption or maturity of unit of a Specified Mutual Fund or Market Linked Debenture as reduced by the cost of acquisition of the debenture or unit and the expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with such transfer or redemption or maturity would be deemed to be the capital gains.
(3)No deduction in respect of STT: No deduction would be allowed in computing the income chargeable under the head “Capital Gains” in respect of any sum paid on account of securities transaction tax (STT).

(4)Meaning of certain terms:
-Market Linked Debenture= A security which has an underlying principal component in the form of debt security; and where the returns are linked to market returns on other underlying securities or indices. It includes any security classified or regulated as a market linked debenture by the SEBI.
-Specified Mutual Fund = A Mutual Fund where not more than 35% of its total proceeds is invested in the equity shares of domestic companies. However, the percentage of equity shareholding held in respect of the Specified Mutual Fund shall be computed with reference to the annual average of the daily closing figures.


SECTION 50B:CAPITAL GAINS IN RESPECT OF	SLUMP SALE:
(1) Meaning of slump sale [Section 2(42C)] – Slump sale means transfer of one or more undertakings, by any means, for a lump sum consideration without values being assigned to the individual assets and liabilities in such transfer.
-Undertaking=It includes any part of an undertaking, or a unit or division of an undertaking or a business activity taken as a whole, but does not include individual assets or liabilities or any combination thereof not constituting a business activity.
-Transfer= Meaning assigned to it in section 2(47) [It would include sale, exchange, relinquishment of capital asset, extinguishment of any rights therein, compulsory acquisition under any law etc. 

Note-The determination of the value of an asset or liability for the sole purpose of payment of stamp duty, registration fees or other similar taxes or fees shall not be regarded as assignment of values to individual assets or liabilities.

(2)Capital gains – Whether long-term or short-term? [Section 50B(1)] - Any profits or gains arising from the slump sale of one or more undertakings held for more than 36 months, shall be chargeable to income-tax as capital gains arising from the transfer of long-term capital assets and shall be deemed to be the income of the previous year in which the transfer took place.
Any profits and gains arising from such transfer of one or more undertakings held by the assessee for not more than 36 months shall be deemed to be short-term capital gains.

(3)Deemed cost of acquisition and cost of improvement [Section 50B(2)(i)] - The net worth of the undertaking or the division, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the cost of acquisition and the cost of improvement for the purposes of sections 48 and 49 in relation to capital assets of such undertaking or division transferred. No indexation benefit would, however, be available, even if the slump sale has taken place of an undertaking held for more than 36 months, resulting in a long-term capital gain.

(4)Deemed full value of consideration [Section 50B(2)(ii)] – Fair market value of the capital assets as on the date of transfer, calculated in the prescribed manner, shall be deemed to be the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of such capital asset.

Accordingly, the CBDT has inserted Rule 11UAE to determine fair market value of the capital assets.
The fair market value of the capital assets shall be the FMV1 or FMV2, whichever is higher.
FMV1 = The fair market value of the capital assets transferred by way of slump sale determined in accordance with the formula
A+B+C+D - L, where,
A=Book value of all the assets (other than jewellery, artistic work, shares, securities and immovable property) as appearing in the books of accounts of the undertaking or the division transferred by way of slump sale as reduced by the following amount which relate to such undertaking or the division, —
(i)any amount of income-tax paid, if any, less the amount of income-tax refund claimed, if any; and
(ii)any amount shown as asset including the unamortised amount of deferred expenditure which does not represent the value of any asset;

B=The price which the jewellery and artistic work would fetch if sold in the open market on the basis of the valuation report obtained from a registered valuer;
C=Fair market value of shares and securities as determined in the manner provided in rule 11UA(1;
D=The value adopted or assessed or assessable by any authority of the Government for the purpose of payment of stamp duty in respect of the immovable property;
L=Book value of liabilities as appearing in the books of accounts of the
undertaking or the division transferred by way of slump sale, but not including the following amounts which relates to such undertaking or division, namely: —
(i)the paid-up capital in respect of equity shares;
(ii)the amount set apart for payment of dividends on preference shares and equity shares where such dividends have not been declared before the date of transfer at a general body meeting of the company;
(iii)reserves and surplus, by whatever name called, even if the resulting figure is negative, other than those set apart towards depreciation;
(iv)any amount representing provision for taxation, other than amount of income-tax paid, if any, less the amount of income-tax claimed as refund, if any, to the extent of the excess over the tax payable with reference to the book profits in accordance with the law applicable thereto;
(v)any amount representing provisions made for meeting liabilities, other than ascertained liabilities;
(vi)any amount representing contingent liabilities other than arrears of dividends payable in respect of cumulative preference shares

FMV2 = The fair market value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer by way of slump sale determined in accordance with the formula –
E+F+G+H, where,
E=value of the monetary consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer;
F=fair market value of non-monetary consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer represented by property referred to in rule 11UA(1) determined in the manner provided in rule 11UA(1) for the property covered in that sub-rule;
G=the price which the non-monetary consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer represented by property, other than immovable property , which is not referred to in rule 11UA(1) would fetch if sold in the open market on the basis of the valuation report obtained from a registered valuer, in respect of property;
H=the value adopted or assessed or assessable by any authority of the Government for the purpose of payment of stamp duty in respect of the immovable property (i.e., Stamp duty value) in case the non-monetary consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer is represented by the immovable property.

The fair market value of the capital assets shall be determined on the date of slump sale and for this purpose, valuation date shall also mean the date of slump sale.

(5)Report of a Chartered Accountant - Every assessee in the case of slump sale shall furnish in the prescribed form on or before the specified date referred under section 44AB i.e., the date one month prior to the due date for filing return of income under section 139(1), a report of a chartered accountant indicating the computation of net worth of the undertaking or division, as the case may be, and certifying that the net worth of the undertaking or division has been correctly arrived at in accordance with the provisions of this section [Sub-section (3)].

Meaning of certain Terms:
(a)Net worth = Aggregate value of total assets of the undertaking or division as reduced by the value of liabilities of such undertaking or division as appearing in the books of account.
However, any change in the value of assets on account of revaluation of assets shall not be considered for this purpose.
(b)Aggregate value of total assets of undertaking or division = In the case of depreciable assets: The written down value of block of assets determined in accordance with the provisions contained in sub-item (C) of item (i) of section 43(6)(c); 
-In case of capital asset, being goodwill of a business or profession, which has not been acquired by the assessee by purchase from a previous owner [self-generated goodwill]: Nil.
-Capital asset in respect of which 100% deduction is claimed: In case of capital assets in respect of which the whole of the expenditure has been allowed or is allowable as a deduction under section 35AD: Nil;
-For all other assets: Book value


Slump sale vs. Itemised sale - In order to really appreciate the benefit of transferring an undertaking via a slump sale, let us take a look at the alternative, i.e. Itemised sale. This is where every asset would be separately valued and sold, each having its own separate consideration. The same can be analysed as follows:
Depreciable assets: Assuming that since an entire business/undertaking is being transferred, all the assets within a particular block are sold off. In such a case, the following amount shall be chargeable to tax as short-term capital gain/(loss):Net Sale consideration – WDV of the block = Capital Gain / (Loss)
Irrespective of the period of holding, depreciable assets will always result in a short term gain or loss. As already mentioned earlier, a short term capital gain would result in being taxed at the normal rates applicable to the company (say 30%).

However, if such depreciable assets are sold as a part of a slump sale, they may attract long term capital gains tax at a lower rate of 20% if the undertaking as a whole has been held for more than 3 years. 

Other assets: Similar to the above, when other short-term capital assets are transferred, the capital gains tax is attracted at the rates as applicable to the company. It will be advantageous to transfer the same through a slump sale where the undertaking is held for more than 3 years which would attract long term capital gain taxable at 20%.

However, in the case of transfer of business (not being a slump sale), the gain on transfer of such non-depreciable assets would be chargeable to tax as business profits (under the head ‘profits and gains of business or profession’). Such business profits would be taxable at the normal rates applicable to the company.

In the case of a loss making company that has brought forward business losses, transfer of business using the itemised sale methodology might be more preferable since the resulting business profits can be set off against the brought forward business losses thereby reducing their tax liability

Case study
Summary of the case: The assessee was engaged in the business of manufacturing sheet metal components. This undertaking was held by the assessee for more than 6 years. It transferred its entire business in one go with all its assets and liabilities to another company for a consideration.

The assessee, in its return of income, treated such sale as a slump sale of the going concern and paid tax on such long term capital gains. The assessing officer was of the opinion that since the transfer involved sale of depreciable assets, it was covered u/s 50(2) (STCG on transfer of depreciable assets) and short term capital gains tax needs to be paid thereon.

The Supreme Court ultimately was of the view that Section 50(2) (STCG on transfer of depreciable assets) may apply to a case where the assessee transfers one or more block of assets which were used by the assessee in the running of his business but where the entire business with is assets and liabilities is sold by the assessee as a running concern, the gain on such transfer cannot be considered as a short term capital gain. The above case covers one of the basic direct tax considerations in a slump sale.

However, there is also an Advance Ruling by the AAR, Karnataka in the case of Rajashri Foods (P) Ltd. where the following conclusions can be drawn from indirect tax (GST) perspective: The slump sale amounts to ‘supply’ under the CGST Act; and Such a supply would be a nil rated supply.

Other matters- A slump sale can have multiple implications other than those already discussed. The following points are noteworthy: Where a person receives any property for inadequate consideration, the difference between the fair market value (FMV) and the actual consideration paid for such property will be chargeable to tax under the head ‘Income from Other Sources’ subject to certain conditions. However, where an entire undertaking is transferred as part of a slump sale (including the immovable property), this provision will not apply. It is not necessary that all the assets need to be transferred to qualify for a slump sale. However, the assets that are transferred should be able to form an undertaking by themselves. The consideration for a slump sale has to be in cash – if the consideration is in the form of shares, bonds, debentures, etc., the transaction will be called an ‘exchange’ and not a sale.

Companies Act implications:
Section 180 of the Companies Act, 2013 imposes restrictions on the powers of the Board. One of the restrictions is ‘to sell, lease or otherwise dispose of the whole or substantially the whole of the undertaking of the company or where the company owns more than one undertaking, of the whole or substantially the whole of any of such undertakings.’
Therefore, in case of slump sale, section 180 shall get attracted and a special resolution of the members shall be required.
For the purpose of this section, ‘undertaking’ shall mean an undertaking in which investment of the company exceeds 20% of its net worth or which generates 20% of the total income.
‘Substantially the whole of the undertaking’ shall mean 20% or more of the value of undertaking.


SECTION 50C:DEEMED FULL	VALUE OF CONSIDERATION	FOR COMPUTING CAPITAL GAINS IN CASE OF Land or Building or both:
1)If Stamp Duty Value > 110% of consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer, Then Deemed Full Value of consideration for computing Capital Gains is Stamp Duty Value.
2)If Stamp Duty Value > 110% of consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer and If  date  of  agreement  is different from the date of transfer and whole or part of
the consideration is received by way of account payee cheque or bank draft or ECS or through such other prescribed electronic mode (IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT, Net banking, debit card, credit card or BHIM Aadhar Pay) on or	before	the date of agreement, then Deemed Full Value of consideration Stamp Duty Value on the date of agreement.
3)If Stamp Duty Value > 110% of consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer and If  date  of  agreement  is different from the date of transfer but the whole or part of the consideration has not been received by way of account payee cheque or bank draft or ECS or through such	other	prescribed electronic mode (IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT, Net banking, debit card, credit card or BHIM Aadhar Pay) on or before the date of agreement,then Deemed Full Value of consideration is Stamp Duty Value on the date of transfer.
4)However, if the stamp duty value on the date of agreement or the date of transfer, as the case may be less than or equal to 110% of the sale consideration received, then Deemed Full Value of consideration is Actual consideration so received.

Example:Let us take a case where for transfer of building – the actual consideration is	rs 100 lakh; the stamp duty value on the date of agreement is rs 109 lakh; and the stamp duty value on the date of transfer is Rs 112 lakh 
(i)  If	any part of the	consideration  is  paid  by prescribed electronic mode on or before the date of	agreement. The actual consideration of Rs 100 lakh would be the full value of consideration, since stamp duty value of Rs 109 lakhs on the date of agreement does not exceed 110% of actual consideration of Rs 100 lakhs.	
(ii) If no part of the consideration is paid by prescribed electronic mode on or before the date of agreement Stamp duty value of Rs 112 lakhs on the date of transfer would be the full value of consideration, since the same exceeds 110% of actual consideration of rs 100 lakhs.

5)Where the Assessing Officer refers the valuation to a Valuation Officer, on the assessee’s claim that the stamp duty value exceeds the FMV of the property on the date of transfer and the stamp duty value has not been disputed in any appeal or revision or no reference has been made before any other authority, court or High Court
-If Valuation by Valuation Officer > Stamp Duty Value =  Deemed Full Value of consideration is Stamp Duty Value.
-If Valuation by Valuation Officer < Stamp Duty Value = Deemed Full Value of consideration is Valuation by Valuation Officer.

6)If stamp duty value has been adopted as full value of consideration, and subsequently the value is revised in any appeal or revision = Value so revised in such appeal or revision


Section 50CA:DEEMED FULL VALUE OF CONSIDERATION	FOR COMPUTING CAPITAL GAINS IN CASE OF Shares other than quoted shares:If consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer < FMV of such share determined in the prescribed manner.The provisions of this section would not, however, be applicable to any consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer by such class of persons and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed = Deemed Full Value of consideration is FMV of such share determined in the prescribed manner.

Prescribed class of persons for the purpose of section 50CA:Rule 11UAD provides that the provisions of section 50CA shall not apply to transfer of any movable property, being unquoted shares, of a company and its subsidiary and the subsidiary of such subsidiary by an assessee, where -
(i)the Tribunal, on an application moved by the Central Government under section 241 of the Companies Act, 2013, has suspended the Board of Directors of such company and has appointed new directors nominated by the Central Government under section 242 of the said Act; and
(ii) share of such company and its subsidiary and the subsidiary of such subsidiary has been transferred pursuant to a resolution plan approved by the Tribunal under section 242 of the Companies Act, 2013 after affording a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or Commissioner.

Meaning of certain terms
(1) A company shall be a subsidiary of another company, if such other company holds more than half in nominal value of the equity share capital of the company.
(2) Tribunal shall have the same meaning assigned to it in section 2(90) of the Companies Act, 2013 i.e., National Company Law Tribunal constituted under section 408 of the said Act.

Note:The fair market value of the shares other than quoted shares would be determined in the manner provided in sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (c), as the case may be, of Rule 11UA(1)(c) and for this purpose the reference to valuation date in the Rule 11U and 11UA shall mean the date on which the capital asset, being share other than quoted shares of a company is transferred (Rule 11UAA)


SECTION 50D:DEEMED FULL VALUE OF CONSIDERATION	FOR COMPUTING CAPITAL GAINS IN CASE OF Any Capital asset: Where the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of a capital asset by an assessee is not ascertainable or cannot be determined = Deemed Full Value of consideration is FMV of the said asset on the date of transfer.


Meaning of Certain Terms:
(i)Stamp Duty Value: As per section 50C, The value adopted or assessed or assessable by any authority of a State Government (Stamp Valuation Authority) for the purpose of payment of stamp duty.
(ii)Assessable:As per section 50C, The term ‘assessable’ has been defined to mean the price which the stamp valuation authority would have, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force, adopted or assessed, if it were referred to such authority for the purposes of the payment of stamp duty. The term “assessable” has been added to cover transfers executed through power of
attorney.
(iii)Quoted Shares: as per section 50CA,The share quoted on any recognised stock exchange with regularity from time to time, where the quotation of such share is based on current transaction made in the ordinary course of business.

SECTION 51:ADVANCE MONEY RECEIVED - It is possible for an assessee to receive some advance in regard to the transfer of capital asset. Due to the break-down of the negotiation, the assessee may have retained the advance. Section 51 provides that while calculating capital gains, the above advance retained by the assessee must go to reduce the cost of acquisition. However, if advance has been received and retained by the previous owner and not the assessee himself, then the same will not go to reduce the cost of acquisition of the assessee. Section 56(2)(ix) provides for the taxability of any sum of money, received as an advance or otherwise in the course of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset. Consequently, such sum shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head ‘Income from other sources’, if such sum is forfeited on or after 1st April, 2014 and the negotiations do not result in transfer of such capital asset. In order to avoid double taxation of the advance received and retained, section 51 provides that where any sum of money received as an advance or otherwise in the course of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset has been included in the total income of the assessee for any previous year in accordance with section 56(2)(ix), then, such amount shall not be deducted from the cost for which the asset was acquired or the written down value or the fair market value, as the case may be, in computing the cost of acquisition.
However, any such sum of money forfeited before 1st April, 2014, will be deducted from the cost of acquisition before applying indexation, if any, for computing capital gains.
To summarise it - Tax treatment of advance money forfeited on failure of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset [Sections 51 & 56(2)(ix)]:
-If advance was received and forfeited = Advance forfeited to be deducted while determining Cost of acquisition for computing capital gains and Taxability is postponed to the year of actual transfer of capital asset.
-If advance was received and forfeited on or after 1-4-2014 = Advance forfeited to be taxed under 56(2)(ix) as Income from other sources and Tax liability is attracted in the year of forfeiture of advance.


EXEMPTION OF CAPITAL GAINS:

(1)Exemption under section 10
The following are the exemption in respect of capital gains under section 10 :
(i)Exemption of capital gain on transfer of a unit of Unit Scheme, 1964 (US 64) [Section 10(33)]
This clause provides that any income arising from the transfer of unit of US 64, shall be exempt from tax. Such transfer should take place on or after 1.4.2002.
(ii)Exemption of capital gains on compulsory acquisition of agricultural land situated within specified urban limits [Section 10(37)]
With a view to mitigate the hardship faced by the farmers whose agricultural land situated in specified urban limits has been compulsorily acquired, clause (37) provide to exempt the capital gains arising to an individual or a HUF from transfer of urban agricultural land by way of compulsory acquisition.
Such exemption is available where the compensation or the enhanced compensation or consideration, as the case may be, is received on or after 1.4.2004.
The exemption is available only when such land has been used for agricultural purposes during the immediately preceding two years from the date of transfer by such individual or a parent of his or by such HUF
Clarification on taxability of the compensation received by the land owners for the land acquired under the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (RFCTLARR Act) [Circular No. 36/2016, dated 25-10-2016]:The RFCTLARR Act which came into effect from 1st January, 2014, in section 96, inter alia provides that income-tax shall not be levied on any award or agreement made (except those made under section 46) under the RFCTLARR Act. Therefore, compensation received for compulsory acquisition of land under the RFCTLARR Act (except those made under section 46 of RFCTLARR Act), is exempted from the levy of income-tax.
As no distinction has been made between compensation received for compulsory acquisition of agricultural land and non-agricultural land in the matter of providing exemption from income-tax under the RFCTLARR Act, the exemption provided under section 96 of the RFCTLARR Act is wider in scope than the tax-exemption provided under the existing provisions of Income-tax Act, 1961.
The CBDT has clarified that compensation received in respect of award or agreement which has been exempted from levy of income-tax vide section 96 of the RFCTLARR Act shall also not be taxable under the provisions of Income-tax Act, 1961 even if there is no specific provision for exemption of such compensation in the Income-tax Act, 1961.

Illustration : Mr. Kumar has an agricultural land costing ` 6 lakh in Lucknow on 1.4.2003 and has been using it for agricultural purposes till 1.8.2012 when the Government took over compulsory acquisition of this land. A compensation of ` 12 lakhs was settled. The compensation was received by Mr. Kumar on 1.7.2023. Compute the amount of capital gains taxable in the hands of Mr. Kumar. Cost Inflation Index: 2003-04: 109, 2012-13: 200, 2023-24: 348
Answer:In the given problem, compulsory acquisition of an urban agricultural land has taken place and the compensation is received after 1.4.2004. This land had also been used for at least 2 years by the assessee himself for agricultural purposes. Thus, as per section 10(37), entire capital gains arising on such compulsory acquisition will be fully exempt and nothing is taxable in the hands of Mr. Kumar in the year of receipt of compensation i.e. , A.Y.2024-25.

Illutartion: Will your answer be different if Mr. Kumar had by his own will sold this land to his friend Mr. Sharma? Examine.
Answer: As per section 10(37), exemption is available if compulsory acquisition of urban agricultural land takes place. Since the sale is out of own will and desire, the provisions of this section are not attracted and the capital gains arising on such sale will be taxable in the hands of Mr. Kumar.

Illustration:Will your answer be different if Mr. Kumar had not used this land for agricultural activities? Examine and compute the amount of capital gains taxable in the hands of Mr. Kumar, if any.
Answer: As per section 10(37), exemption is available only when such land has been used for agricultural purposes during the preceding two years by such individual or his parent or by such HUF. Since the assessee has not used it for agricultural activities, the provisions of this section are not attracted and the capital gains arising on such compulsory acquisition will be taxable in the hands of Mr. Kumar in the year of receipt of compensation i.e., A.Y. 2024-25.
Sales consideration[Rs 12,00,000] - Cost of Acquisition [6,00,000 x 200/109 = 11,00,917] = Long term capital Gains [99,083]

Illustration:Will your answer be different if the land belonged to ABC Ltd. and not Mr. Kumar and compensation on compulsory acquisition was received by the company? Examine
Answer:Section 10(37) exempts capital gains arising to an individual or a HUF from transfer of agricultural land by way of compulsory acquisition. If the land belongs to ABC Ltd., a company, the provisions of this section are not attracted and the capital gains arising on such compulsory acquisition will be taxable in the hands of ABC Ltd.


(2)Exemption of Capital Gains under section 54/54B/54D/54EC/54F/54G/54GA

(i)Capital Gains on sale of residential house [Section 54] Eligible assessees – Individual & HUF Conditions to be fulfilled
•There should be a transfer of residential house (buildings or lands appurtenant thereto)
•It must be a long-term capital asset
•Income from such house should be chargeable under the head “Income from house property”
•Where the amount of capital gains exceeds Rs 2 crore

Where the amount of capital gain exceeds Rs 2 crore, one residential house in India should be –
purchased within 1 year before or 2 years after the date of transfer (or)
constructed within a period of 3 years after the date of transfer.
•Where the amount of capital gains does not exceed Rs 2 crore
Where the amount of capital gains does not exceed Rs 2 crore, the assessee i.e., individual or HUF, may at his option,
purchase two residential houses in India within 1 year before or 2 years after the date of transfer (or)
construct two residential houses in India within a period of 3 years after the date of transfer.
Where during any assessment year, the assessee has exercised the option to purchase or construct two residential houses in India, he shall not be subsequently entitled to exercise the option for the same or any other assessment year.
This implies that if an assessee has availed the option of claiming benefit of section 54 in respect of purchase of two residential houses in Jaipur and Jodhpur, say, in respect of capital gains of Rs 1.50 crores arising from transfer of residential house at Mumbai in the P.Y.2023-24 then, he will not be entitled to avail the benefit of section 54 again in respect of purchase of two residential houses in, say, Pune and Baroda, in respect of capital gains of Rs 1.20 crores arising from transfer of residential house in Jaipur in the P.Y.2026-27, even though the capital gains arising on transfer of the residential house at Jaipur does not exceed Rs 2 crore.
•If such investment is not made before the date of filing of return of income, then the capital gain has to be deposited under the Capital Gains Account Scheme (CGAS) [Refer points (viii) and (ix) of this sub-heading (2)]. However, the capital gain in excess of Rs 10 crore would not be taken into account for the purpose of deposit in CGAS.
•Amount utilised by the assessee for purchase or construction of new asset and the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be the cost of new asset. The deemed cost of the new asset would be restricted to Rs 10 crores for the purpose of exemption under section 54.
 
Quantum of Exemption
•If cost of new residential house or houses, as the case may be ≥ long-term capital gains, entire long-term capital gains is exempt.
•If cost of new residential house or houses, as the case may be < long-term capital gains, long-term capital gains to the extent of cost of new residential house is exempt
However, if the cost of new residential house(s) exceeds Rs 10 crores, the amount exceeding ` 10 crore would not be taken into account for exemption. It means the maximum exemption that can be claimed by the assessee u/s 54 is Rs 10 crore.

Example:1)If the long-term capital gains is Rs 2.05 crores and the cost of the new house is Rs 3 crores, then, the entire long-term capital gains of Rs 2.05 crores is exempt.
2)If long-term capital gains is Rs 2.05 crores and cost of new house is Rs 1.55 crores, then, long-term capital gains is exempt only upto Rs 1.55 crores. Balance Rs 50 lakhs is taxable @ 20%.
3)If long-term capital gains is Rs 7 crores and cost of new residential 12 crores, but maximum deduction can be claimed is Rs 10 crores as per restriction of section 54, but maximum deduction is restricted to long-term capital gain of Rs 7 crores, hence, Long-term capital gains is exempt upto 7crores.
4)If long-term capital gains is Rs 12 crores and cost of new residential 14 crores, but maximum deduction can be claimed is Rs 10 crores as per restriction of section 54, hence, Long-term capital gains is exempt upto 10 crores.
5)If long-term capital gains is Rs 11 crores and cost of new residential 9 crores, but maximum deduction can be claimed is Rs 10 crores as per restriction of section 54, hence, Long-term capital gains is exempt upto 9 crores.
6)If long-term capital gains is Rs 15 crores and cost of new residential 13 crores, but maximum deduction can be claimed is Rs 10 crores as per restriction of section 54, hence, Long-term capital gains is exempt upto 10 crores.

7)If the LTCG is rs 8 crore and the assessee has incurred rs 5 crore in construction of new residential house upto the due date u/s 139(1) i.e., 31.7.2024/ 31.10.2024, as the case may be, then, as per section 54(2), he can deposit the amount of rs 3 crore not appropriated by him towards construction of house upto 31.7.2024/31.10.2024, as the case may be, in Capital Gains Account Scheme (CGAS) for claiming exemption under section 54. If he deposits, say, rS 2 crore, in CGAS on or before the due date u/s 139(1), the deemed cost of the new residential house would be ` 7 crore (` 5 crore + ` 2 crore). The amount exempt u/s 54 would be rS 7 crore.
8)If the LTCG is rS  14 crore and the assessee has already incurred RS 7 crore in construction of new residential house upto 31.7.2024/31.10.2024, as the case may be, then, as per section 54(2), he can deposit the difference of rS 3 crore (rS 10 crore - RS 7 crore) in CGAS for claiming exemption u/s 54. If he deposits, say, RS 2 crore in CGAS on or before the due date u/s 139(1), the deemed cost of the new residential house would be rS 9 crore (rS 7 crore + RS 2 crore). The amount exempt under section 54 would be  RS 9 crore.

Consequences of transfer of new asset before 3 years - If the new asset is transferred before 3 years from the date of its acquisition or construction, then, cost of the asset will be reduced by capital gains exempted earlier for computing capital gains. Example: The long-term capital gains is rS 2.05 crore and the cost of the new house is Rs 3 crore, the entire long-term capital gains of Rs 2.05 crore will be exempt. If the new house was sold after 18 months for Rs 5 crore, then, short term capital gain chargeable to tax would be –
Net consideration(5,00,000) - (Cost of Acqusisition(3,00,00,000) - capital gain exempt earlier(2,50,00,000))[95,00,000] = Short term capital gain(4,05,00,000)



SECTION 54B- Capital Gains on transfer of agricultural land 

Eligible assessee – Individual & HUF
Conditions to be fulfilled
•There should be a transfer of urban agricultural land.
•Such land must have been used for agricultural purposes by the assessee, being an individual or his parent, or a HUF in the 2 years immediately preceding the date of transfer.
•He should purchase another agricultural land (urban or rural) within 2 years from the date of transfer.
•If such investment is not made before the date of filing of return of income, then the capital gain has to be deposited under the CGAS . Amount utilised by the assessee for purchase of new asset and the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be the cost of new asset.
Quantum of exemption
•If cost of new agricultural land ≥ capital gains, entire capital gains is exempt.
•If cost of new agricultural land < capital gains, capital gains to the extent of cost of new agricultural land is exempt.

Example - 1)If the capital gains is Rs 3 lakhs and the cost of the new agricultural land is Rs 4 lakhs, then the entire capital gains of Rs 3 lakhs is exempt.
2)If capital gains is Rs 3 lakhs and cost of new agricultural land is Rs 2 lakhs, then capital gains is exempt only upto Rs 2 lakhs.


Consequences of transfer of new agricultural land before 3 years
•If the new agricultural land is transferred before 3 years from the date of its acquisition, then cost of the land will be reduced by capital gains exempted earlier for computing capital gains of new agricultural land.
•However, if the new agricultural land is a rural agricultural land, there would be no capital gains on transfer of such land.
•Continuing in the above example, if the new agricultural land (urban land) is sold after, say, 1 year for rs 6 lakhs, then short-term capital gain chargeable to tax would be –
Net consideration [6,00,000] - (cost of acquisition - exempt earlier capital)[4,00,000-3,00,000] = Short -term capital gain [5,00,000]


SECTION 54D -Capital Gains on transfer by way of compulsory acquisition of land and building of an industrial undertaking:
Eligible assessee – Any assessee
Conditions to be fulfilled - 
•There must be compulsory acquisition of land and building or any right in land or building forming part of an industrial undertaking.
•The land and building should have been used by the assessee for purposes of the business of the industrial undertaking in the 2 years immediately preceding the date of transfer.
•The assessee must purchase any other land or building or any right in land or building or construct any building (for shifting or re-establishing the existing undertaking or setting up a new industrial undertaking) within 3 years from the date of transfer.
•If such investment is not made before the date of filing of return of income, then the capital gain has to be deposited under the CGAS [Refer points (viii) and (ix) of this sub-heading (2)]. Amount utilised by the assessee for purchase of new asset and the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be the cost of new asset.
 
Quantum of exemption-
•If cost of new asset ≥ Capital gains, entire capital gains is exempt.
•If cost of new asset < Capital gains, capital gains to the extent of cost of new asset is exempt.

Note:The exemption in respect of capital gains from transfer of capital asset would be available even in respect of short-term capital asset, being land or building or any right in any land or building, provided such capital asset is used by assessee for the industrial undertaking belonging to him, even if he was not the owner for the said period of 2 years.

Consequences of transfer of new asset before 3 years - If the new asset is transferred before 3 years from the date of its purchase or construction, then cost of the asset will be reduced by capital gains exempted earlier for computing capital gains.


SECTION 54EC - Capital Gains not chargeable on investment in certain bonds:
Eligible assessee – Any assessee
Conditions to be fulfilled:
•There should be transfer of a long-term capital asset being land or building or both.
•Such asset can also be a depreciable asset being a building held for more than 24 months. [CIT v. Dempo Company Ltd (2016) 387 ITR 354 (SC)]
•The capital gains arising from such transfer should be invested in a long-term specified asset within 6 months from the date of transfer.
•Long-term specified asset means specified bonds, redeemable after 5 years, issued on or after 1.4.2018 by the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) or the Rural Electrification Corporation Limited (RECL) or any other bond notified by the Central Government in this behalf.
•The assessee should not transfer or convert or avail loan or advance on the security of such bonds for a period of from the date of acquisition of such bonds.

Note - In case of conversion of capital asset into stock in trade and subsequent sale of stock in trade - Period of 6 months to be reckoned from the date of sale of stock in trade for the purpose of section 54EC exemption [CBDT Circular No.791 dated 2-6-2000].

Quantum of exemption: Capital gains or amount invested in specified bonds, whichever is lower.
Ceiling limit for investment in long-term specified asset: The maximum investment which can be made in notified bonds or bonds of NHAI and RECL, out of capital gains arising from transfer of one or more assets, during the previous year in which the original asset is transferred and in the subsequent financial year cannot exceed Rs 50 lakhs.
Violation of condition:
In case of transfer or conversion of such bonds or availing loan or advance on security of such bonds before the expiry of 5 years, the capital gain exempted earlier shall be taxed as long-term capital gain in the year of violation of condition.

Illustration - Long-term capital gain of Rs 75 lakh arising from transfer of building on 1.5.2023 will be fully exempt from tax if such capital gain is invested in the bonds redeemable after five years, issued by NHAI under section 54EC. Examine with reasons whether the given statement is true or false having regard to the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
Answer:False: The exemption under section 54EC has been restricted, by limiting the maximum investment in long term specified assets (i.e., bonds of NHAI or RECL or any other bond notified by Central Government in this behalf, redeemable after 5 years) to Rs 50 lakh, whether such investment is made during the relevant previous year or the subsequent previous year, or both. Therefore, in this case, the exemption under section 54EC can be availed only to the extent of Rs 50 lakh, provided the investment is made before 1st november 2023 (i.e., within six months from the date of transfer).
The exemption under section 54EC is available in respect of capital gains on transfer of capital asset being land or building or both.


SECTION 54F- Capital gains in cases of investment in residential house:
Eligible assessees: Individuals/ HUF
Conditions to be fulfilled:
•There must be transfer of a long-term capital asset, not being a residential house.
•Transfer of plot of land is also eligible for exemption
•The assessee should -
-Purchase one residential house situated in India within a period of 1 year before or 2 years after the date of transfer; or
-Construct one residential house in India within 3 years from the date of transfer.
-If such investment is not made before the date of filing of return of income, then the net sale consideration has to be deposited under the CGAS. However, the net consideration in excess of Rs 10 crore would not be taken into account for the purpose of deposit in CGAS.
•Amount utilised by the assessee for purchase or construction of new asset and the amount so deposited shall deemed to be the cost of new asset. The deemed cost of
new asset would be restricted to ` 10 crores for the purpose of exemption
under section 54F.
•The assessee should not own more than one residential house on the date of transfer.
-The assessee should not –
-purchase any other residential house within a period of 2 years or
-construct any other residential house within a period of 3 years from the date of transfer of the original asset.

Quantum of exemption:
•If cost of new residential house ≥ Net sale consideration of original asset, entire capital gains is exempt.
•If cost of new residential house < Net sale consideration of original asset, only proportionate capital gains is exempti.e. [LTCG *(Amount invested in new residential house/Net sale consideration)]

However, if the cost of new residential house/ amount invested in new residential house exceeds Rs 10 crore, the amount exceeding Rs 10 crore would not be taken into account for exemption.

Example:1)if Net consideration is 15 crore and LTCG is computed at 7.5 crore and cost of new residential house is 12 crore , then as per restriction cost of new residential house cannot exceed 10 crore, hence amount invested in new residential property will be 10 crore. Exempt LTCG will be computed as 7.5*(10/15)= 5 crore [ LTCG *(Amount invested in new residential house/Net sale consideration)]
2)if Net consideration is 20 crore and LTCG is computed at 12 crore and cost of new residential house is 15 crore , then as per restriction cost of new residential house cannot exceed 10 crore, hence amount invested in new residential property will be 10 crore. Exempt LTCG will be computed as 12*(10/20)= 6 crore [ LTCG *(Amount invested in new residential house/Net sale consideration)]
3)if Net consideration is 16 crore and LTCG is computed at 12 crore and cost of new residential house is 8 crore , then as per restriction cost of new residential house cannot exceed 10 crore, ,as cost of new residential property doesn't exceed 10 crore,hence amount invested in new residential property will be 10 crore. Exempt LTCG will be computed as 12*(8/16)= 6 crore [ LTCG *(Amount invested in new residential house/Net sale consideration)]
4)if Net consideration is 10 crore and LTCG is computed at 6 crore and cost of new residential house is 10 crore , then as per restriction cost of new residential house cannot exceed 10 crore, ,as cost of new residential property doesn't exceed 10 crore,hence amount invested in new residential property will be 10 crore. Exempt LTCG will be computed as 6*(10/10)= 6 crore [ LTCG *(Amount invested in new residential house/Net sale consideration)]
5)if Net consideration is 12 crore and LTCG is computed at 6 crore and cost of new residential house is 12 crore , then as per restriction cost of new residential house cannot exceed 10 crore, ,as cost of new residential property exceed 10 crore,hence amount invested in new residential property will be 10 crore. Exempt LTCG will be computed as 6*(10/12)= 5 crore [ LTCG *(Amount invested in new residential house/Net sale consideration)]

6)If the net consideration is Rs 9 crore, the capital gain is  Rs 4.50 crore and the amount incurred for construction of new residential house upto 31.7.2024/31.10.2024, as the case may be, is Rs 5 crore, then, as per section 54F(4), the assessee can deposit the amount of Rs 4 crore (i.e., Rs 9 crore – Rs 5 crore) not appropriated towards construction upto 31.7.2024/ 31.10.2024, as the case may be, in CGAS for claiming exemption u/s 54F. If the assessee has deposited, say, Rs 3 crore on or before 31.7.2024/ 31.10.2024, as the case may be, the deemed cost of new residential house would be Rs 8 crore (Rs 5 crore + Rs 3 crore).  The exemption u/s 54F would be Rs 4 crore [i.e., Rs4.50 crore x  Rs8 crore/ Rs9 crore].

7)If the net consideration is Rs 15 crore, the capital gain is Rs 7.50 crore and the amount incurred for construction of new residential house upto 31.7.2024/31.10.2024, as the case may be, is Rs 6 crore, the assessee can deposit Rs 4 crore [i.e., Rs10 crore – Rs6 crore] on or before 31.7.2024/31.10.2024, as the case may be, in CGAS for claiming exemption u/s 54F. If the assessee has deposited, say, Rs 3 crore on or before the due date of filing return u/s 139(1), the deemed cost of new residential house would be Rs 9 crore (Rs 6 crore + Rs 3 crore).  The exemption u/s 54F would be Rs 4.50 crore [i.e., Rs 7.50 crore x Rs9 crore/Rs 15crore].

Consequences if the new house is transferred within 3 years from the date of its purchase:If the new asset is transferred before the expiry of 3 years from the date of its purchase or construction, as the case may be, then capital gains arises on transfer of the new house and the capital gains exempted earlier under section 54F would be taxable as long-term capital gains.
Note:In case the new residential house is sold after 2 years, the capital gains would be long-term capital gains and indexation benefit would be available.

Consequences where assessee purchases any other residential house within 2 years or constructs within 3 years from the date of transfer of original asset: The capital gain exempted earlier under section 54F would be deemed to be long-term capital gains and chargeable to tax in the previous year in which such residential house is purchased or constructed.



SECTION 54G:Exemption of capital gains for shifting of industrial undertaking from urban areas 

Eligible assessees: Any assessee
Conditions to be fulfilled
•There should be a shifting of the industrial undertaking from an urban area to any other area other than an urban area.
•There should be a transfer of machinery, plant, building or land or any right in building or land used for the business of an industrial undertaking situated in an urban area.
•Such transfer should be in the course of, or in consequence of, shifting the industrial undertaking from an urban area to any other area other than an urban area.
•The capital gain (short-term or long-term) should be utilised for any of the following purposes within 1 year before or 3 years after the date of transfer –
•purchase of new plant and machinery for the purposes of business of the industrial undertaking in the area to which the said undertaking is shifted;
•acquisition of building or land or construction of building for the purposes of his business in the said area;
 
•shifted the original asset and transferred the establishment of such industrial undertaking from the urban area to the other area;
•incurred expenses on such other purpose as may be specified in a scheme framed by the Central Government.
•If such investment is not made before the date of filing of return of income, then the capital gain has to be deposited under the CGAS. [Refer points (viii) at the end of this sub-heading (2)]. Amount utilised by the assessee for purchase of new asset and expenses of shifting and the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be the cost of new asset.

Quantum of exemption
•If cost of new assets plus expenses incurred for the specified purpose ≥ Capital
gains, entire capital gains (short-term or long-term) is exempt.
•If cost of new assets plus expenses incurred for the specified purpose < Capital gains, capital gains (short-term or long-term) to the extent of such cost and expenses is exempt.

Consequences if the new asset is transferred within a period of 3 years:If the new asset is transferred within a period of 3 years of its purchase or construction, then the capital gain, which was exempt earlier under section 54G would be deducted from the cost of acquisition of the new asset for the purpose of computation of capital gains in respect of the transfer of the new asset.


SECTION 54GA: Exemption of capital gains on transfer of certain capital assets in case of shifting of an industrial undertaking from an urban area to any SEZ :
Eligible assesses – Any assessee
Conditions to be fulfilled
•There must be transfer of capital assets
•Such transfer must be effected in the course of, or in consequence of the shifting of an industrial undertaking from an urban area to any SEZ, whether developed in an urban area or not.
•The capital asset should be either machinery or plant or building or land or any rights in building or land used for the purposes of the business of an industrial undertaking situated in an urban area.
•The assessee should, within a period of 1 year before or 3 years after the date of transfer,
-purchase machinery or plant for the purposes of business of the industrial undertaking in the SEZ;
-acquire building or land or construct building for the purposes of his business in the SEZ;
-shifted the original asset and transferred the establishment of such industrial undertaking from the urban area to the SEZ; and
-incurred expenses for such other purposes as may be specified in a scheme framed by the Central Government.

•If such investment is not made before the date of filing of return of income, then the capital gain has to be deposited under the CGAS [Refer points (viii) at the end of this sub-heading (2)]. Amount utilised by the assessee for purchase of new asset and expenses of shifting and the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be the cost of new asset.

Quantum of exemption:
•If cost of new assets plus expenses incurred for shifting ≥ Capital gains, entire
capital gains (short-term or long-term) is exempt.
•If cost of new assets plus expenses incurred for shifting < Capital gains, capital gains (short-term or long-term) to the extent of such cost and expenses is exempt.

Consequences if the new asset is transferred within a period of 3 years:If the new asset is transferred within a period of 3 years of its purchase or construction, then the capital gain, which was exempt earlier under section 54GA would be deducted from the cost of acquisition of the new asset for the purpose of computation of capital gains in respect of the transfer of the new asset.


CAPITAL GAINS ACCOUNT SCHEME (CGAS):Under sections 54, 54B, 54D, 54F, 54G and 54GA, capital gains is exempt to the extent of investment of such gains/ net consideration (in the case of section 54F) in specified assets within the specified time. If such investment is not made before the date of filing of return of income, then the capital gain or net consideration (in case of exemption under section 54F
& 54GB) has to be deposited under the CGAS. However, the capital gain in excess of Rs 10 crore would not be taken into account for the purpose of deposit in CGAS in case of section 54 and the net consideration in excess of ` 10 crore would not be taken into account for the purpose of deposit in CGAS in case of section 54F.

Time limit:Such deposit in CGAS should be made before filing the return of income or on or before the due date of filing the return of income, whichever is earlier. In such cases, the amount already utilized for purchase or construction of new asset plus the amount deposited under the CGAS on or before due date u/s 139(1) would be deemed to be the cost of new asset.
However, for the purpose of sections 54 and 54F, the amount so deemed to be the cost of the new asset cannot exceed Rs 10 crore. Proof of such deposit should be attached with the return. The deposit can be withdrawn for utilization for the specified purposes in accordance with the scheme.

Consequences if the amount deposited in CGAS is not utilized within the stipulated time of 2 years / 3 years: If the amount deposited is not utilized for the specified purpose within the stipulated period, then the unutilized amount shall be charged as capital gain of the previous year in which the specified period expires. In the case of section 54F and 54GB, proportionate amount will be taxable.
CBDT Circular No.743 dated 6.5.96 clarifies that in the event of death of an individual before the stipulated period, the unutilized amount is not chargeable to tax in the hands of the legal heirs of the deceased individual. Such unutilized amount is not income but is a part of the estate devolving upon them.


SECTION 54H: Extension of time for acquiring new asset or depositing or investing amount of Capital Gain - In case of compulsory acquisition of the original asset, where the compensation is not received on the date of transfer, the period available for acquiring a new asset or making investment in CGAS under sections 54, 54B, 54D, 54EC and 54F would be considered from the date of receipt of such compensation and not from the date of the transfer.



SECTION 55A:REFERENCE  TO  VALUATION  OFFICER:
Section 55A provides that the Assessing Officer may refer the valuation of a capital asset to a Valuation Officer in the following circumstances with a view to ascertaining the fair market value of the capital asset for the purposes of capital gains -
(i)In a case where the value of the asset as claimed by the assessee is in accordance with the estimate made by a registered valuer, if the Assessing Officer is of the opinion that the value so claimed is at variance with its fair market value.
Under this provision, the Assessing Officer can make a reference to the Valuation Officer in cases where the fair market value is taken to be the sale consideration of the asset. An Assessing Officer can also make a reference to the Valuation Officer in a case where t he fair market value of the asset as on 01.04.2001 is taken as the cost of the asset, if he is of the view that there is any variation between the value as on 01.04. 2001 claimed by the assessee in accordance with the estimate made by a registered valuer and the fair market value of the asset on that date.
(ii)If the Assessing Officer is of the opinion that the fair market value of the asset exceeds the value of the asset as claimed by the assessee by more than 15% of the value of asset as so claimed or by more than ` 25,000.
(iii)The Assessing Officer is of the opinion that, having regard to the nature of asset and other relevant circumstances, it is necessary to make the reference.


SECTION 111A:TAX ON SHORT TERM CAPITAL GAINS IN RESPECT OF EQUITY SHARES/ UNITS OF AN EQUITY ORIENTED FUND/ UNITS OF A BUSINESS TRUST-
(1)Concessional rate of tax in respect of STCG on transfer of certain assets: This section provides for a concessional rate of tax i.e. 15% on the short-term capital gains on transfer of -
(i)an equity share in a company or
(ii)a unit of an equity oriented fund or
(iii)a unit of a business trust. 
(2)Conditions: The conditions for availing the benefit of this concessional rate are –
(i)the transaction of sale of such equity share or unit should be entered into on or after 1.10.2004, being the date on which Chapter VII of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2004 came into force; and
(ii)such transaction should be chargeable to securities transaction tax under the said Chapter.
However, short-term capital gains arising from transactions undertaken in foreign currency on a recognized stock exchange located in an International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) would be taxable at a concessional rate of 15% even though STT is not lev iable in respect of such transaction.
(3)Adjustment of Unexhausted Basic Exemption Limit: In the case of resident individuals or HUF, if the basic exemption is not fully exhausted by any other income, then the short - term capital gain will be reduced by the unexhausted basic exemption limit and only the balance would be taxed at 15%. However, the benefit of availing the basic exemption limit is not available in the case of non-residents.
(4)No deduction under Chapter VI-A against STCG taxable under section 111A: Deductions under Chapter VI-A cannot be availed in respect of such short-term capital gains on equity shares of a company or units of an equity oriented fund or unit of a business trust included in the total income of the assessee.

SECTION 112:TAX ON LONG TERM CAPITAL GAINS- 
(1)Concessional rate of tax: Where the total income of an assessee includes long-term capital gains, tax is payable by the assessee @20% on such long-term capital gains. The treatment of long-term capital gains in the hands of different types of assessees are as follows -
(i)Resident individual or Hindu undivided family: Income-tax payable at normal rates on total income as reduced by long-term capital gains plus 20% on such long- term capital gains.

Adjustment of Unexhausted Basic Exemption Limit: However, where the total income as reduced by such long-term capital gains is below the maximum amount which is not chargeable to income-tax then such long-term capital gains shall be reduced by the amount by which the total income as so reduced falls short of the maximum amount which is not chargeable to income-tax and the tax on the balance of such long-term capital gains will be calculated @20%.
(ii)Domestic Company: Long-term capital gains will be charged @ 20%.
(iii)Non-corporate non-resident or foreign company:
(a)Long-term capital gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset, being unlisted securities or shares of a company not being a company in which public are substantially interested, would be calculated at the rate of 10% on the capital gains in respect of such asset without giving effect to the indexation provision under second proviso to section 48 and currency fluctuation under first proviso to section 48.
(b)In respect of other long-term capital gains, the applicable rate of tax would be 20%.
(iv)Residents (other than those included in (i) above): Long-term capital gains will be charged @20%.

(2)Lower rate of tax for transfer of listed securities and zero coupon bonds: Where the tax payable in respect of any income arising from the transfer of a listed security (other than a unit) or a zero coupon bond, being a long-term capital asset, exceeds 10% of the amount of capital gains before indexation, then such excess shall be ignored while computing the tax payable by the assessee i.e. lower of the tax @10% without indexation or tax @20% with indexation benefit. Consequently, long-term capital gains on transfer of units and unlisted securities are not eligible for concessional rate of tax@10% (without indexation benefit). Therefore, the long - term capital gains, in such cases, are taxable @20% (with indexation benefit). However, in case of non-corporate non-residents and foreign companies, long-term capital gains arising from transfer of a capital asset, being unlisted securities or shares in a company in which public are not substantially interested are eligible for a concessional rate of tax @10% (without indexation benefit).

(3)No deduction under Chapter VI-A against LTCG: The provisions of section 112 make it clear that the deductions under Chapter VIA cannot be availed in respect of the long -term capital gains included in the total income of the assessee.

Further explanation:
Capital gains are taxed as per the tenure of holding investments. The gains on investments are broadly classified into long-term capital gains or short-term capital gains. The taxation of long-term capital gains is divided under two provisions, i.e. Section 112 and Section 112A of the Income Tax Act.

Latest Update:Amendment to Finance Bill 2023 scrapped the indexation benefit for gains from debt mutual funds, and they will be taxed at investor’s slab rates. Thus, from 1st April 2023, gains from debt mutual funds with only around 35% equity exposure are going to be taxed at the investor’s slab rates and are considered as short-term capital gains.

Section 112 applies to whom?- Section 112 applies to all types of taxpayers, such as individuals, HUF, company, firm, resident, non-resident (not a company), a foreign company, etc.

What types of long-term assets are covered under Section 112? - Section 112 specifies income tax rates on all kinds of long-term capital assets, such as-
(i)Listed securities
(ii)LTCG on zero-coupon bonds 
(iii)Unlisted securities 
(iv)Immovable property 
(v)Other long-term capital assets

This section does not apply to the capital assets covered under Section 112A below-
(i)Listed equity shares where STT paid on acquisition or transfer 
(ii)Units of equity-oriented mutual funds where STT paid on transfer 
(iii)Units of business trust where STT paid on transfer

What is the tax rate on long-term capital gain covered under Section 112?
-If there is LTCG on listed securities (other than units) = Tax rate is 10% on gains more than Rs.1 lakh
-If there is LTCG on zero-coupon bonds =Tax rate is lower of-10% (without indexation) and 20% (with indexation)
-In the case of a non-resident (other than a company) or a foreign company, if there is LTCG from unlisted securities or shares = Tax rate is 10% on LTCG without computation of capital gain in foreign currency and indexation. i.e. Tax = 10% x (Sale price – Cost of Acquisition)
-For any other long-term capital asset such as immovable property sold by a resident =Tax rate is 20%

There taxation rates for various types of long-term capital gains are as follows:
(i)Equity mutual funds = 10% on gains more than Rs.1 lakh without indexation.
(ii)Zero-coupon bonds = Lower of 20% after indexation (Resident) or 10% without indexation.
(iii)Equity Shares(Listed) = 10% on gains more than Rs.1 lakh.
(iv)Unlisted equity shares(Resident) = 20% with indexation.
(v)Unlisted equity shares(Non-resident) = 10% without indexation(Non-resident).
(vi)Immovable Property = 20% with indexation.

How to calculate the tax liability if total income includes long-term capital gain? - If the total income of the taxpayer includes income from the transfer of long-term capital assets, then the income tax liability will be calculated as below-
(1)Reduce the total taxable income by the amount of long-term capital gains (LTCG) and calculate tax on the income so reduced as per the normal applicable tax rates applicable to individuals or a HUF.
(2)Separately calculate tax on the long-term capital gains at rates specified above.
(3)Add both the amounts (1+2) to know the total tax liability.

Important notes - 
-In the case of individuals and HUFs, if the normal income, i.e. income excluding the long-term capital gain, is less than the basic exemption limit, then set off the unadjusted amount with the long-term capital gains and calculate tax on LTCG at specified rates.
For example - Suppose an individual (below 60 years of age) has a total income of Rs 3.5 lakh in which long-term capital gain (mutual funds units) of Rs 3 lakh is included. Here, the normal income (Rs 3.5 lakh – Rs 3 lakh= Rs 50,000) is less than the basic exemption limit (Rs 2.5 lakh). So the tax payable by the individual can be calculated as below-
Income excluding LTCG – Rs 50,000 (Rs 3.5 lakh – Rs 3 lakh), then LTCG=Rs 3 lakh,Tax payable on Rs 50,000 = Nil, Basic exemption limit = Rs 2.5 lakh, Unadjusted amount (Basic exemption limit - Income excluding LTCG) = Rs 2 lakh (Rs 2.5 lakh – Rs 50,000), LTCG after adjusting basic exemption limit(LTCG - Unadjusted amount) = Rs 1 lakh (3 lakh – Rs 2 lakh), 20% tax on adjusted LTCG (20% x LTCG after adjusting basic exemption limit)=Rs 20,000 (20% on Rs 1 lakh). Finally, total tax payable will be Tax payable on Rs 50,000 + 20% tax on adjusted LTCG = 20,000 (Excluding cess)[0+20,000].

-The benefit of the basic exemption limit mentioned above does not apply to non-residents. 
-Chapter VI-A deduction will not apply to long-term capital gains. For example -Suppose an individual (below 60 years of age) has a gross total income of Rs 4 lakh in which long term capital gain (mutual funds units) of Rs 3 lakh is included. Chapter VI-A deduction is Rs 1.5 lakh. Here, the gross total income excluding LTCG is Rs 1 lakh (Rs. 4 lakh – Rs 3 lakh). You can adjust the Chapter VI-A deduction from normal income only, not LTCG. Hence. Your normal income will be Nil after claiming Chapter VI-A deductions. Hence, the total income tax liability will be calculated as under. Income after deductions will be nil, LTCG will be 3 lakhs, Tax payable on normal income = 0, Basic exemption Limit=Rs 2.5 lakh, Unadjusted amount(Basic exemption limit - Income after deductions)= 2.5 lakh (Rs 2.5 lakh -0), LTCG after adjusting basic exemption limit (LTCG-Unadjusted amount)=50,000(Rs 3 lakh – Rs 2.5 lakh). 20% tax on adjusted LTCG(20% * LTCG after adjusting basic exemption limit) = Rs 10,000 (20% of Rs50,000), Total tax payable(Tax payable normal income+ 20% tax on adjusted LTCG) = 10,000 (0+10,000).

Reporting of LTCG in ITR form:Taxpayers must report income from capital gains in ITR-2 and ITR-3 forms. They must report the below details for reporting LTCG under Schedule CG of the ITR:
-The full consideration value, i.e. sale value
-Deductions under Section 48
-Indexed cost of acquisition, i.e. purchase value
-Indexed cost of improvement, if applicable
-Expenditure exclusively and wholly in connection with transfer, i.e. transfer expenses

The LTCG will be automatically computed.


Set off and carry forward of Long Term Capital Loss (LTCG) under Section 112:The loss on sale of a capital asset held for more than the holding period is a Long Term Capital Loss (LTCL) as per Section 112. A taxpayer can set off the LTCL from one capital asset against the LTCG from another capital asset. As per the income tax rules for set off and carry forward of losses, a taxpayer can set off the LTCL against the LTCG only in the current year. However, a taxpayer can carry forward the remaining loss for 8 years and set off only against future LTCG.



SECTION 112A:TAX ON LONG TERM CAPITAL GAINS ON CERTAIN  ASSETS:
(1)Concessional rate of tax in respect of LTCG on transfer of certain assets: In order to minimize economic distortions and curb erosion of tax base, section 112A provides that notwithstanding anything contained in section 112, a concessional rate of tax @10% will be leviable on the long-term capital gains exceeding ` 1,00,000 on transfer of –
(a)an equity share in a company or
(b)a unit of an equity oriented fund or
(c)a unit of a business trust.
 
(2)Conditions: The conditions for availing the benefit of this concessional rate are–
(a)In case of equity share in a company, STT has been paid on acquisition and transfer of such capital asset
(b)In case of unit of an equity oriented fund or unit of business trust, STT has been paid on transfer of such capital asset.
However, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the nature of acquisition of equity share in a company on which the condition of payment of STT on acquisition would not be applicable.
Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide notification No. 60/2018, dated 1st October, 2018, notified that the condition of chargeability of STT shall not apply to the acquisition of equity shares entered into
-before 1st October, 2004 or
-on or after 1st October, 2004 which are not chargeable to STT, other than the following transactions.
In effect, only in respect of the following transactions mentioned in column (2), the requirement of paying STT at the time of acquisition for availing the benefit of concessional rate of tax under section 112A would apply. In may be noted that the exceptions are listed in column (3) against the transaction. The requirement of payment of STT at the time of acquisition for availing benefit of concessional tax rate under section 112A will not apply to acquisition transactions mentioned under:
-Where acquisition of existing listed equity share in a	company whose equity shares are not frequently traded in a recognised stock exchange of India is made through a preferential issue= Non-applicability of condition of chargeability of STT, Where acquisition of listed equity share in a company has been approved by the Supreme Court, High Court, National Company Law Tribunal, Securities and Exchange Board of India or Reserve Bank of India in this behalf;is by any non-resident in accordance with foreign direct investment guidelines issued by the Government of India;is by an investment fund referred to in clause (a) of Explanation 1 to section 115UB or a venture capital fund referred to in section 10(23FB) or a Qualified Institutional Buyer;is through preferential issue to which the provisions of chapter VII of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Issue of Capital and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2009 does not apply.
-Where transaction for acquisition of existing listed equity share in a company is not entered through a recognised stock exchange in India = Non-applicability of condition of chargeability of STT,Following acquisitions of listed equity share in a company made in accordance with the provisions of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, acquisition through an issue of share by a company other than through preferential issue referred in above point;acquisition by scheduled banks, reconstruction or securitisation companies or public financial institutions during their ordinary course of business;acquisition approved by the Supreme Court, High Courts, National Company Law Tribunal, Securities and Exchange Board of India or Reserve Bank of India in this behalf;acquisition under employee stock option scheme or employee stock purchase scheme framed under the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Employee Stock Option Scheme and Employee Stock Purchase Scheme) Guidelines,1999;acquisition by any non-resident in accordance with foreign direct investment guidelines of the Government of India;acquisition in accordance with Securities and Exchange Board of India (Substantial Acquisition of Shares and Takeovers) Regulation, 2011;acquisition from the Government;acquisition by an investment fund referred to in clause (a) to Explanation 1 to section 115UB or a venture capital fund referred to in section 10(23FB) or a Qualified Institutional Buyer;acquisition by mode of transfer referred to in section 47 (e.g., transfer of capital asset under a gift, an irrevocable trust, transfer of capital asset between holding company and its subsidiary, transfer pursuant to amalgamation, demerger, etc.) or section 50B (slump sale) or section 45(3) (Introduction of capital asset as capital contribution in firm/ AOPs/ BOIs) or section 45(4) (Tax implications on receipt of money or capital assets or both on reconstitution of firm/AOP or BOI) of the Income-tax Act, if the previous owner or the transferor, as the case may be, of such shares has not acquired them by any mode referred to points mention above, in this point or in next point we are going to discuss [other than the exceptions listed  in next point]
-acquisition of equity share of a company during the period beginning from the date on which the company is delisted from a recognised stock exchange and ending on the date immediately preceding the date on which the company is again listed on a recognised stock exchange in accordance with the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 read with SEBI Act,1992 and the rules made thereunder.



Further, long-term capital gains arising from transaction undertaken on a recognized stock exchange located in an International Financial Service Centre (IFSC) would be taxable at a concessional rate of 10%, where the consideration for transfer is received or receivable in foreign currency, even though STT is not leviable in respect of such transaction.

(3)Adjustment of Unexhausted Basic Exemption Limit: In the case of resident individuals or HUF, if the basic exemption is not fully exhausted by any other income, then such long- term capital gain exceeding ` 1 lakh will be reduced by the unexhausted basic exemption limit and only the balance would be taxed at 10%.
However, the benefit of adjustment of unexhausted basic exemption limit is not available in the case of non-residents. It is also not available in case of resident AOPs and BOIs.
(4)No deduction under Chapter VI-A against LTCG taxable under section 112A: Deductions under Chapter VI-A cannot be availed in respect of such long-term capital gains on equity shares of a company or units of an equity oriented fund or unit of a business trust included in the total income of the assessee.
(5)No benefit of rebate under section 87A against LTCG taxable under section 112A: Rebate under section 87A is not available in respect of tax payable @10% on LTCG under section 112A.
Subsequent to insertion of section 112A, the CBDT has issued clarification F. No. 370149/20/2018-TPL dated 04.02.2018 in the form of a Question and Answer format to clarify certain issues raised in different fora relating to the new tax regime for taxation of long-term capital gains. The relevant questions raised and answers to such questions as per the said Circular are given hereunder:
Q.1What is the meaning of long term capital gains under the new tax regime for long term capital gains?
Ans 1. Long term capital gains mean gains arising from the transfer of long-term capital asset.
It provides for a new long-term capital gains tax regime for the following assets –
(i).Equity Shares in a company listed on a recognised stock exchange;
(ii).Unit of an equity oriented fund; and
(iii).Unit of a business trust.
The new tax regime applies to the above assets, if–
a.the assets mentioned in (i) & (ii) are held for a minimum period of twelve months from the date of acquisition; and the asset mentioned in (iii) is held for a minimum period of thirty six months; and
b.the Securities Transaction Tax (STT) is paid at the time of transfer. However, in the case of equity shares acquired after 1.10.2004, STT is required to be paid even at the time of acquisition (subject to notified exemptions).

Q 2.What is the point of chargeability of the tax?
Ans 2. The tax will be levied only upon transfer of the long-term capital asset on or after 1st April, 2018, as defined in section 2(47) of the Act.

Q 3.What is the method for calculation of long-term capital gains?
Ans 3. The long-term capital gains will be computed by deducting the cost of acquisition from the full value of consideration on transfer of the long-term capital asset.

Q 4.How do we determine the cost of acquisition for assets acquired on or before 31st January, 2018?
Ans 4.The cost of acquisition for the long-term capital asset acquired on or before 31st January, 2018 will be the actual cost. However, if the actual cost is less than the fair market value of such asset as on 31st January, 2018, the fair market value will be deemed to be the cost of acquisition.Further, if the full value of consideration on transfer is less than the fair market value, then such full value of consideration or the actual cost, whichever is higher, will be deemed to be the cost of acquisition.
 
Q 5.Please provide illustrations for computing long-term capital gains in different scenarios, in the light of answer to question 4.
Ans 5.The computation of long-term capital gains in different scenarios is illustrated as under
Scenario 1 – An equity share is acquired on 1st January, 2017 at ` 100, its fair market value is ` 200 on 31st January, 2018 and it is sold on 1st April, 2023 at ` 250. As the actual cost of acquisition is less than the fair market value as on 31st January, 2018, the fair market value of ` 200 will be taken as the cost of acquisition and the long-term capital gain will be ` 50 (` 250 – ` 200).
Scenario 2 – An equity share is acquired on 1st January, 2017 at ` 100, its fair market value is ` 200 on 31st January, 2018 and it is sold on 1st April, 2023 at ` 150. In this case, the actual cost of acquisition is less than the fair market value as on 31st January, 2018. However, the sale value is also less than the fair market value as on 31st January, 2018. Accordingly, the sale value of ` 150 will be taken as the cost of acquisition and the long- term capital gain will be NIL (` 150 – ` 150).
Scenario 3 – An equity share is acquired on 1st January, 2017 at ` 100, its fair market value is ` 50 on 31st January, 2018 and it is sold on 1st April, 2023 at ` 150. In this case, the fair market value as on 31st January, 2018 is less than the actual cost of acquisition, and therefore, the actual cost of ` 100 will be taken as actual cost of acquisition and the long-term capital gain will be ` 50 (` 150 – ` 100).
Scenario 4 – An equity share is acquired on 1st January, 2017 at ` 100, its fair market value is ` 200 on 31st January, 2018 and it is sold on 1st April, 2023 at ` 50. In this case, the actual cost of acquisition is less than the fair market value as on 31st January, 2018. The sale value is less than the fair market value as on 31st January, 2018 and also the actual cost of acquisition. Therefore, the actual cost of ` 100 will be taken as the cost of acquisition in this case. Hence, the long-term capital loss will be ` 50 (` 50 – ` 100) in this case.

Q 6.  Whether the cost of acquisition will be inflation indexed?
Ans 6.Third proviso to section 48, provides that the long-term capital gain will be computed without giving effect to the provisions of the second proviso of section 48. Accordingly, it is clarified that the benefit of inflation indexation of the cost of acquisition would not be available f or computing long-term capital gains under the new tax regime.
 
Q 7.  What will be the tax treatment of transfer made on or after 1st April 2018?
Ans 7.The long-term capital gains exceeding ` 1 lakh arising from transfer of these assets made on after 1st April, 2018 will be taxed at 10 per cent. However, there will be no tax on gains accrued upto 31st January, 2018.

Q 8.  What is the date from which the holding period will be counted?
Ans 8. The holding period will be counted from the date of acquisition.

Q 9.  Whether tax will be deducted at source in case of gains by resident tax payer?
Ans 9.No. There will be no deduction of tax at source from the payment of long-term capital gains to a resident tax payer.

Q 10. What will be the cost of acquisition in the case of bonus shares acquired before 1st February 2018?
Ans 10. The cost of acquisition of bonus shares acquired before 31st January, 2018 will be determined as per section 55(2)(ac). Therefore, the fair market value of the bonus shares as on 31st January, 2018 will be taken as cost of acquisition (except in some typical situations explained in Ans 5), and hence, the gains accrued upto 31st January, 2018 will continue to be exempt6.

Q 11. What will be the cost of acquisition in the case of right share acquired before 1st February 2018?
Ans 11. The cost of acquisition of right share acquired before 31st January, 2018 will be determined as per section 55(2)(ac). Therefore, the fair market value of right share as on 31st January, 2018 will be taken as cost of acquisition (except in some typical situations explained in Ans 5), and hence, the gains accrued upto 31st January, 2018 will continue to be exempt.

Q 12. What will be the treatment of long-term capital loss arising from transfer made on or after 1st April, 2018?
Ans 12. Long-term capital loss arising from transfer made on or after 1st April, 2018 will be allowed to be set-off and carried forward in accordance with existing provisions of the Act. Therefore, it can be set-off against any other long-term capital gains and unabsorbed loss can be carried forward to subsequent eight years for set-off against long-term capital gains.



Further commentary on Section 112A- 
Section 112A provides for long-term capital gains(LTCG)  tax on the sale of listed equity shares, equity-oriented mutual funds and business trust. The rate of long-term capital gains tax on these listed securities is 10% for gains exceeding the threshold of Rs 1 lakh. The ITR forms contain schedule 112A to fill in scrip-wise details of these listed securities sold during a financial year. A taxpayer having long-term capital gains under the grandfathering provisions of section 112A should mandatorily fill the details in schedule 112A.

Section 112A was inserted by the Finance Act 2018 to tax long-term capital gains from the sale of listed equity shares, units of equity-oriented mutual funds and units of business trust. Schedule 112A brought to tax gains which were earlier exempt until FY 2017-18 (AY 2018-19). Earlier, section 10(38) allowed a capital gains exemption from the sale of listed equity shares, units of mutual funds and business trust.

Scope Of Section 112A
The conditions to tax capital gains under section 112A are:
-The sale should be of listed equity shares, units of a equity-oriented mutual fund and units of a business trust.
-The securities should be long-term capital assets (Holding period greater than 1 year).
-The transactions of purchase and sale of equity share are subject to STT (Securities Transaction Tax). In the case of equity-oriented mutual fund units or business trust, the transaction of the sale is liable to STT.
-Deduction under Chapter VI-A cannot be availed in respect of such gains
-Rebate under Section 87A cannot be claimed from these gains

Long-term Capital Gains Under Section 112A:
The tax under Section 112A is only on long-term capital gains(LTCG). The period of holding should be more than one year to qualify for taxation under section 112A. The tax rate is 10% above a threshold exemption of Rs 1 lakh. This means the long-term capital gains covered under section 112A are not taxable up to Rs 1 lakh per financial year. The gains exceeding Rs 1 lakh are liable to tax at 10% plus education cess and applicable surcharge. 
For example, if a taxpayer has annual (net) long-term capital gain under section 112A of Rs. 1,50,000, then the tax of 10% under section 112A is on Rs. 50,000 (Rs. 1,50,000 – Rs. 1,00,000). 
A resident individual or HUF whose total income after reducing the long-term capital gains is below the basic exemption limit, and then the long-term capital gains stand reduced by such shortfall. 
For example, we consider a taxpayer’s total income is Rs 4,00,000 and (net) long-term capital gains under section 112A is Rs 2,00,000. Here, the balance income after reducing capital gains is Rs 2 lakh which is below the basic exemption limit. 
The amount by which the reduced total income falls short of the basic exemption limit is Rs. 50,000 (Rs 2,50,000 – Rs 2,00,000). The taxable long-term capital gains will be Rs 1,50,000 (Rs 2,00,000 – Rs 50,000).

Set-Off Long-Term Capital Loss From Long-Term Capital Gain:
The loss, if any, upon the sale of long-term listed equity shares or units mentioned above is a long-term capital loss. You can set off the loss against long-term capital gain only. In case of losses from a few securities and gains from other securities, you can set-off the losses from the gains. The net gains only get taxed and only if the net gains exceed Rs 1,00,000. 
See the illustration under point no. 5 below. 
You can carry forward the long-term capital loss, which you cannot set off for eight years succeeding the assessment year in which you incur the loss.

Grandfathering Provisions Under Section 112A of Income-tax Act:In the Budget 2018, there has been a proposal to Grandfather investments made on or before 31 January 2018. 
What is the concept of Grandfathering? :When a new clause or policy is added to a law, certain persons may be relieved from complying with the new clause. This is called “grandfathering”. “Grandfathered” persons enjoy the right to avail the concession because they have made their decisions under the old law. 

The concept of grandfathering in the case of LTCG on the sale of equity investments works as follows: A method of determining the Cost of Acquisition (COA) of such investments has been specifically laid down as per the COA of such investments shall be deemed to be the higher of:
The actual COA of such investments; and The lower of:
-Fair Market Value (‘FMV’) of such investments; and
-the Full Value of Consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of the capital asset i.e. the Sale Price

Further, the FMV would be the highest price quoted on the recognized stock exchange on 31 January 2018. 

In case there is no trading of the said asset in such stock exchange, the highest price on a day immediately preceding 31 January 2018 shall be considered to be the FMV. In effect, the taxpayer can claim the highest price quoted on the recognised stock exchange on 31 January 2018 as the COA and claim the deduction for the same. 

The computation mechanism has been further explained by way of the following examples, Capital Gain/ Loss = Sale Price – Revised Cost of Acquisition on 31.1.2018

Example 1
Mr X bought equity shares on 15th Dec 2016 for Rs. 10,000. FMV of the shares was Rs. 12,000 as of 31st Jan, 18. He sold the shares on 10th May 2020 for Rs. 15,000. What will be the long-term capital gain/ loss?

Cost of Acquisition (COA) 

Higher of –

-Original COA i.e. Rs. 10,000, and  
-Lower of –
(i)FMV on 31.1.18 i.e. Rs. 12,000, and
(ii)Sale Price i.e. Rs. 15,000
Hence, COA = Higher of (Rs. 10,000 or Rs. 12,000) Rs. 12,000

Capital Gain/ (Loss)

Sale Price – Cost of Acquisition = Rs. 15,000 – Rs. 12,000 = Rs. 3,000﻿


Example 2
Mr A purchased equity shares on 20th Jan 2018 for Rs. 16,000. FMV of the shares was Rs. 11,000 as of 31st Jan, 2018. He sold the shares on 26th Apr 2022 for Rs. 26,000. What will be the long-term capital gain/ loss?

Cost of Acquisition (COA) 

Higher of –
-Original COA, i.e. Rs. 16,000, and  
-Lower of –
(i)FMV on 31.1.18, i.e. Rs. 11,000, and
(ii)Sale Price, i.e. Rs. 26,000
Hence, COA = Higher of (Rs. 16,000 or Rs. 11,000) Rs. 16,000 

Capital Gain/ (Loss)

Sale Price – Cost of Acquisition = Rs. 26,000 – Rs. 16,000 = Rs. 10,000

Example 3
Mr. D bought equity shares on 11th Nov 2016 for Rs. 19,500. FMV of the shares was Rs. 12,000 as of 31st Jan, 2018. He sold the shares on 21st May 2018 for Rs. 9,000. What will be the long-term capital gain/ loss?

Cost of Acquisition (COA) 

Higher of –
-Original COA i.e. Rs. 19,500, and  
-Lower of –
(i)FMV on 31.1.18 i.e. Rs. 12,000, and
(ii)Sale Price i.e. Rs. 9,000
Hence, COA = Higher of (Rs. 19,500 or Rs. 9,000) Rs. 19,500 

Capital Gain/ (Loss)

Sale Price – Cost of Acquisition = Rs. 9,000 – Rs. 19,500 = Rs. (10,500)

Example 4
Mr. D bought equity shares on 23rd Oct, 2016 for Rs. 14,500. FMV of the shares was Rs. 18,000 as on 31st Jan 2018. He sold the shares on 18th May, 2018 for Rs. 7,000. What will be the long-term capital gain/ loss?

Cost of Acquisition (COA) 

Higher of –

-Original COA i.e. Rs. 14,500, and  
-Lower of –
(i)FMV on 31.1.18 i.e. Rs. 18,000, and
(ii)Sale Price i.e. Rs. 7,000
Hence, COA = Higher of (Rs. 14,500 or Rs. 7,000) Rs. 14,500 

Capital Gain/ (Loss)

Sale Price – Cost of Acquisition = Rs. 7,000 – Rs. 14,500 = Rs. (7,500)

Example 5
Mr J bought equity shares on 13th Nov 2010 for Rs. 12,000. FMV of the shares was Rs. 30,000 as of 31st Jan, 2018. He sold the shares on 11th May 2019 for Rs.25,000 What will be the long-term capital gain/ loss?

Cost of Acquisition (COA) 

Higher of –
-Original COA i.e. Rs. 12,000, and
-Lower of below i.e Rs. 25,000-
(i)FMV on 31.1.18 i.e. Rs. 30,000, and
(ii)Sale Price i.e. Rs. 25,000
Hence, COA = Higher of (Rs. 12,000 or Rs. 25,000) Rs. 25,000 

Capital Gain/ (Loss)

Sale Price – Cost of Acquisition = Rs. 25,000 – Rs. 25,000 = 0(Nil)


further analysis of the LTCG implications of certain other scenarios, which will help understand the proposed amendment better(It has been assumed that all CG is long term capital gain):
1)Purchase and sale before 31/1/2018 - Exempt under Section 10(38)
2)Purchase before 31/1/2018,Sale after 31/1/2018 but before 1/4/2018 - Exempt under Section 10(38)
3)Purchase before 31/1/2018, Sale on or after 1/4/2018 - LTCG taxable, However, Gains accrued before 31/1/2018 are exempt and Capital Gains computed in the manner as discussed above.
4)Purchase after 31/1/2018, Sale on or after 1/4/2018 - LTCG taxable, Capital Gains computed in the manner as discussed above

LTCG on transfer of bonus and rights shares acquired on or before 31 January 2018:The LTCG for these shares shall be calculated by considering the FMV on 31st January 2018 as the COA of such shares, thereby exempting gains until 31st January 2018 from tax. Eg: You have ITC shares purchased on 1st April 2016 and issued bonus shares as on 1st April 2017. Now if such bonus shares are sold after 31st Jan 2018, then FMV as of 31st Jan 2018 will be considered as the Cost of acquisition of such shares.

meaning of certain terms:
(i)Fair Market Value:The Fair Market Value (FMV) of a listed security is the highest price quoted on a recognised stock market.
(ii)If the security was not traded on 31 January 2018, the FMV is the highest price quoted on a date immediately before 31 January 2018 when the security was traded on a recognised stock exchange.
(iii) In the case of unlisted units on January 31, 2018, the net asset value of the units on that date.
(iv)The FMV of an equity share listed after January 31 2018, or acquired through a merger or other transfer under Section 47 will be: Purchase price *Cost inflation index for fiscal year 2017-18 / Cost inflation index for the year of purchase or fiscal year 2001-02.


Reporting under Schedule 112A of the ITR
The income tax returns for AY 2024-25 contain Schedule 112A to enable scrip-wise reporting of long-term capital gains where grandfathering provisions are applicable. Schedule 112A requires data such as ISIN code, name of the scrip, number of units or shares sold, sale price, purchase cost and FMV as on 31 January 2018. The details are necessary to arrive at the correct amount of long-term capital gains where the grandfathering provisions are applicable. 

In Schedule 112A, as below, data w.r.t long-term capital gains needs to be disclosed in your ITR. However scrip wise disclosure is required only in case of shares or mutual funds bought before 31st Jan 2018 and sold in the current assessment year. Scrip-wise details are not required if shares or mutual funds were bought after 31st Jan 2018 and sold in the current assessment year.


SURPLUS ON SALE OF SHARES AND SECURITIES - WHETHER TAXABLE AS CAPITAL GAINS OR BUSINESS INCOME? [CIRCULAR NO. 06/2016,  DATED 29-2-2016]:

Section 2(14) defines the term "capital asset" to include property of any kind held by an assessee, whether or not connected with his business or profession, but does not include any stock-in-trade or personal assets subject to certain exceptions. As regards shares and other securities, the same can be held either as capital assets or stock-in-trade/trading assets or both. Determination of the character of a particular investment in shares or other securities, whether the same is in the nature of a capital asset or stock-in-trade, is essentially a fact-specific determination and has led to a lot of uncertainty and litigation in the past.

Parameters laid down by CBDT and Courts to distinguish shares held as investments and shares held as stock in trade: Over the years, the courts have laid down different parameters to distinguish the shares held as investments from the shares held as stock-in-trade. The CBDT has also, through Instruction No. 1827, dated August 31, 1989 and Circular No. 4 of 2007 dated June 15, 2007, summarized the said principles for guidance of the field formations.
Principles to determine whether gains on sale of listed shares and other securities would constitute capital gains or business income: Disputes, however, continue to exist on the application of these principles to the facts of an individual case since the taxpayers find it difficult to prove the intention in acquiring such shares/securities. In this background, while recognizing that no universal principle in absolute terms can be laid down to decide the character of income from sale of shares and securities (i.e. whether the same is in the nature of capital gain or business income), CBDT realizing that major part of shares/securities transactions takes place in respect of the listed ones and with a view to reduce litigation and uncertainty in the matter, in partial modification to the aforesaid Circulars, further instructs the Assessing Officers to take into account the following while deciding whether the surplus generated from sale of listed shares or other securities would be treated as Capital Gain or Business Income—
a)Where assessee opts to treat such shares and securities as stock-in-trade: Where the assessee itself, irrespective of the period of holding the listed shares and securities, opts to treat them as stock-in-trade, the income arising from transfer of such shares/securities would be treated as its business income,
b)Listed shares and securities held for a period of more than 12 months: In respect of listed shares and securities held for a period of more than 12 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer, if the assessee desires to treat the income arising from the transfer thereof as Capital Gain, the same shall not be put to dispute by the Assessing Officer. However, this stand, once taken by the assessee in a particular Assessment Year,
 
shall remain applicable in subsequent Assessment Years also and the taxpayers shall not be allowed to adopt a different/contrary stand in this regard in subsequent years ;
c)Other cases: In all other cases, the nature of transaction (i.e. whether the same is in the nature of capital gain or business income) shall continue to be decided keeping in view the aforesaid Circulars issued by the CBDT.
Principles listed above not to apply in case of sham transactions
It is, however, clarified that the above shall not apply in respect of such transactions in shares/securities where the genuineness of the transaction itself is questionable, such as bogus claims of Long-term Capital Gain/Short Term Capital Loss or any other sham transactions.
Objective of formulation of principles: Reducing litigation and ensuring consistency
It is reiterated that the above principles have been formulated with the sole objective of reducing litigation and maintaining consistency in approach on the issue of treatment of income derived from transfer of shares and securities. All the relevant provisions of the Act shall continue to apply on the transactions involving transfer of shares and securities.



SIGNIFICANT CASE LAWS - 

(1)Seshasayee Steels P. Ltd. v. ACIT (2020) 421 ITR 46 (SC):
Issue:Can any transaction which enables the enjoyment of immovable property be considered as enjoyment as a purported owner thereof for being treated as a “transfer” of a capital asset u/s 2(47)(vi) and levy of tax on capital gains arising therefrom?
Analysis and Decision:Any transaction which has the effect of transferring or enabling the enjoyment of any immovable property would come within the of purview u/s 2(47)(vi). Section 2(47)(vi) appears to be to bring within its tax net, a de facto transfer of any immovable property. The expression 'enabling the enjoyment of' takes colour from the earlier expression 'transferring', so that it is clear that any transaction which enables the enjoyment of immovable property must be enjoyment as a purported owner thereof. The idea is to bring within the tax net, transactions, where, though title may not be transferred in law, there is, in substance, a transfer of title in fact.
In this case, the assessee's rights in the immovable property were extinguished on the receipt of the last cheque. Further, the compromise deed could be stated to be a transaction which had the effect of transferring the immovable property in question. Accordingly, the transaction fell u/s 2(47)(ii) and (vi). Hence, it is a transfer in relation to the capital asset and capital gains tax liability would be attracted.


(2)Balakrishnan v. Union of India & Others (2017) 391 ITR 178 (SC):
Issue:Would receipt of higher compensation after notification of compulsory acquisition change the character of transaction into a voluntary sale, so as to deny exemption u/s 10(37)(iii)?
Analysis and decision:When proceedings were initiated under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, even if the compensation is negotiated and fixed, it would continue to remain as compulsory acquisition. Merely because the compensation amount is agreed upon, the character of acquisition will not change from compulsory acquisition to a voluntary sale. The claim of exemption from capital gains u/s 10(37)(iii) is, therefore, tenable in law.

(3)CIT v. V.S. Dempo Company Ltd (2016) 387 ITR 354 (SC):
Issue:In a case where a depreciable asset (building) held for more than 24 months is transferred, can benefit of exemption u/s 54EC be claimed, if the capital gains on sale of such asset are reinvested in long-term specified assets within the specified time?
Analysis and decision:The assessee cannot be denied exemption u/s 54EC, because firstly, there is nothing in section 50 to suggest that the fiction created therein is not restricted to only sections 48 and 49. Secondly, fiction created by the legislature has to be confined for the purpose for which is created. Thirdly, section 54EC does not make any distinction between depreciable and non-depreciable asset for the purpose of re-investment of capital gains in long term specified assets for availing the exemption thereunder. Further, section 54EC specifically provides that when the capital gain arising on the transfer a long-term capital asset (being land or building or both) is invested or deposited in long-term specified assets, the assessee shall not be subject to capital gains to that extent. Therefore, the exemption u/s 54EC cannot be denied to the assessee on account of the fiction created in section 50.

(4)Fibre Boards (P) Ltd v. CIT (2015) 376 ITR 596 (SC):
Issue:Can advance given for purchase of land, building, plant and machinery tantamount to utilization of capital gain for purchase and acquisition of new machinery or plant and building or land, for claim of exemption u/s 54G?
Analysis and Decsion:For the purpose of availing exemption, all that was required for the assessee is to “utilise” the amount of capital gain for purchase and acquisition of new machinery or plant and building or land. Since the entire amount of capital gain, in this case, was utilized by the assessee by way of advance for acquisition of land, building, plant and machinery, the assessee is entitled to avail exemption/deduction u/s 54G.

(5)CIT v. Aditya Kumar Jajodia (2018) 407 ITR 107 (Cal):
Issue: Can the amount incurred by the assessee towards perfecting title of property acquired through will, for making further sale, be included in the cost of acquisition for computing capital gains?
Analysis and Decision:The assessee had inherited the immovable property under a will and the costs incurred by him for perfection of the title from perpetual leasehold rights to the complete ownership had to be regarded as a cost of acquisition within the meaning of sections 48 and 55, as the assessee was transferring the complete ownership rights to the transferee, and not the leasehold rights.

(6)CIT v. Manjula J. Shah (2013) 355 ITR 474 (Bom.):
Issue:Would indexation benefit in respect of the gifted asset apply from the year in which the asset was first held by the assessee or from the year in which the same was first acquired by the previous owner?
Analysis and Decision:The indexed cost of acquisition in case of gifted asset has to be computed with reference to the year in which the previous owner first held the asset and not the year in which the assessee became the owner of the asset.

(7)Sakthi Metal Depot v. CIT [2021] 436 ITR 1 (SC):
Issue:Would the depreciable asset forming part of block of assets on which depreciation is being allowed since its acquisition change its character if it is not used for business purpose for the last two years, to the effect that gain arising from its transfer be considered as long term capital gain instead of short-term capital gains?
Analysis and Decision:The depreciable asset forming a part of block of assets within the meaning section 2(11) would not cease to be a part of the block of assets so long as the assessee continued business. In this case, the building forming part of the block of assets would retain its character as such, even if one or two of the assets in the block were not used for the business purposes in the last couple of years. Consequently, the profits arising on sale of such asset would be short-term capital gains.

(8)CIT v. Syed Ali Adil (2013) 352 ITR 0418 (A.P.) and CIT v. Ananda Basappa (2009) 309 ITR 329 and CIT v. K.G. Rukminiamma (2011) 331 ITR 211:
Issue:Would an assessee be entitled to exemption under section 54 in respect of purchase of two flats, adjacent to each other and having a common meeting point?
Analysis and Decision:The assessee is entitled to investment in both the flats purchased by him, since they were adjacent to each other and had a common meeting point, thus, making it a single residential unit.The assessee is entitled to investment in both the flats purchased by him, since they were adjacent to each other and had a common meeting point, thus, making it a single residential unit.
Note – Section 54 has been amended by the Finance Act, 2019 to permit claim of deduction in respect of two residential houses purchased/constructed, where long-term capital gains on sale of residential house does not exceed ` 2 crores. However, this case law will still hold good since the exemption for investment in two residential houses cannot be availed -
-where long term capital gains > ` 2 crores; and
-where long term capital gains ≤ ` 2 crores and exemption of acquiring two properties was already availed once

Even in these cases, the benefit of treating adjacent flats as one residential house for the purpose of exemption under section 54 would be available as per this High Court ruling. Furthermore, even in cases where long term capital gains ≤ 2 crores, the benefit of this case law can be availed and benefit of one time exemption under section 54 can be deferred and availed at a later point of time.

(9)CIT v. Gurnam Singh (2010) 327 ITR 278 (P&H):
Issue:Can exemption u/s 54B be denied solely on the ground that the new agricultural land purchased is not wholly owned by the assessee, as the assessee’s son is a co- owner as per the sale deed?
Analysis and Decision:The agricultural land sold belonged to the assessee and the sale proceeds were also used for purchasing agricultural land. The possession of the said land was also taken by the assessee. Merely because the assessee’s son was shown in the sale deed as co-owner, deduction u/s 54B cannot be denied. Therefore, the assessee was entitled to deduction u/s 54B.

(10)CIT v. Kamal Wahal (2013) 351 ITR 4 (Delhi):
Issue:Can exemption u/s 54F be denied solely on the ground that the new residential house is purchased by the assessee exclusively in the name of his wife?
Analysis & Decision:For the purpose of section 54F, a new residential house need not necessarily be purchased by the assessee in his own name nor is it necessary that it should be purchased exclusively in his name. Having regard to the rule of purposive construction and the object of enactment of section 54F, the assessee is entitled to claim exemption u/s 54F in respect of utilization of sale proceeds of capital asset for investment in residential house property in the name of his wife.

(11)CIT v. Ravinder Kumar Arora (2012) 342 ITR 38 (Delhi)
Issue:In case of a house property registered in joint names, can exemption u/s 54F be allowed fully to the co- owner who has paid whole of the purchase consideration of the house property or will it be restricted to his share in the house property?
Analysis & Decision:The inclusion of his wife’s name in the sale deed was just to avoid any litigation after his death. All the funds invested in the said house were provided by the assessee, including the stamp duty and corporation tax paid at the time of the registration of the sale deed of the said house. This fact was also clearly evident from the bank statement of the assessee.
Section 54F mandates that the house should be purchased by the assessee but it does not stipulate that the house should be purchased only in the name of the assessee. In this case, the house was purchased by the assessee in his name and his wife's name was also included additionally. Therefore, the conditions stipulated in section 54F stand fulfilled and the entire exemption claimed in respect of the purchase price of the house property shall be allowed to the assessee.

(12)CIT v. Sambandam Udaykumar (2012) 345 ITR 389 (Kar.):
Issue:Can exemption u/s 54F be denied to an assessee in respect of investment made in construction of a residential house, on the ground that the construction was not completed within 3 years after the date on which transfer took place, on account of pendency of certain finishing work like flooring, electrical fittings, fittings of door shutter etc.?
Analysis & Decision:The condition precedent for claiming the benefit u/s 54F is that capital gains realized from sale of capital asset should have been invested either in purchasing a residential house or in constructing a residential house within the stipulated period. If the assessee has invested the money in the construction of a residential house, merely because the construction was not completed in all respects and possession could not be taken within the stipulated period, would not disentitle him from claiming exemption u/s 54F. In fact, in this case, the assessee has taken possession of the residential building and is living in the said premises despite the pendency of flooring work, electricity work, fitting of door and window shutters. Therefore, the assessee is entitled to exemption u/s 54F in respect of the amount invested in construction within the prescribed period.

(13)Gouli Mahadevappa v. ITO (2013) 356 ITR 90 (Kar.):
Issue:Where the stamp duty value under section 50C has been adopted as the full value of consideration, can the reinvestment made in acquiring a residential property, which is in excess of the actual net sale consideration, be considered for the purpose of computation of exemption under section 54F, irrespective of the source of funds for such reinvestment?
Analysis & Decision:When capital gain is assessed on notional basis as per the provisions of section 50C, and the higher value i.e., the stamp duty value under section 50C has been adopted as the full value of consideration, the entire amount reinvested in the residential house within the prescribed period should be considered for the purpose of exemption under section 54F, irrespective of the source of funds for such reinvestment. For eg: if stamp duty value =  Rs50 lakh, actual consideration =Rs 40 lakh, capital gains = Rs 12 lakh, if Rs 47 lakh is re-invested in residential house, then exemption u/s 54F = Rs 12 lakh *47 lakh/  50 lakh = Rs11.28 lakh (assuming gross and net consideration are same), irrespective of the source of balance rs 7 lakh (Rs 47 lakh - Rs 40 lakh) over and above actual consideration.

(14)Hindustan Unilever Ltd. v. DCIT (2010) 325 ITR 102 (Bom.):
Issue:Can exemption u/s 54EC be denied on account of the bonds being issued after six months of the date of transfer even though the payment for the bonds was made by the assessee within the six-month period?
Analysis & Decision:In order to avail the exemption u/s 54EC, the capital gains have to be invested in a long-term specified asset within a period of six months from the date of transfer. Where the assessee has made the payment within the six month period, and the same is reflected in the bank account and a receipt has been issued as on that date, the exemption u/s 54EC cannot be denied merely because the bond was issued after the expiry of the six month period or the date of allotment specified therein was after the expiry of the six month period.

(15)Principal CIT v. Gujarat State Fertilizers and Chemicals Limited (2018) 409 ITR 378 (Guj):
Issue:Would sale of fertilizer bonds (issued in lieu of government subsidy) at loss be treated as a business loss or a loss under the head “Capital gains”?
Analysis & Decision:Fertilizer subsidy given to an assessee to compensate the loss on sale of fertilisers should be treated as business income of the assessee. Due to cash crunch, the Government of India had discharged its dues of paying the subsidy by issue of fertilizer bonds. These bonds are saleable in the open market and the prices of such bonds are varying. In this case also, the assessee received fertilizer bonds (in lieu of subsidy) which were sold at a loss in the open market.
Since the subsidy would have been treated as business income, loss on sale of fertilizer bonds issued is to be allowed as business loss.








