Income from Other Sources:Any income, profits or gains includible in the total income of an assessee, which cannot be included under any of the preceding heads of income, is chargeable under the head ‗Income from other sources‘. Thus, this head is the residuary head of income and brings within its scope all the taxable income, profits or gains of an assessee which fall outside the scope of any other head. Therefore, when any income, profit or gain does not fall precisely under any of the other specific heads but is chargeable under the provisions of the Act, it would be charged under this head.

SECTION 145:METHOD OF ACCOUNTING:Income chargeable under the head ―Income from other sources‖ has to be computed in
accordance with the cash or mercantile system of accounting regularly employed by the assessee.
Under section 145(2), the Central Government is empowered to notify in Gazette from time to time, income computation and disclosure standards to be followed by any class of assessees or in respect of any class of income.
Accordingly, Central Government has notified ten ICDSs to be followed by all assessees (other than an individual or a HUF who is not required to get his accounts of the previous year audited in accordance with the provisions of section 44AB) following the mercantile system of accounting, for the purpose of computation of income chargeable to income-tax under the head ―Profits and gains from business or profession or ―Income from other sources.


SECTION 56:INCOMES CHARGEABLE UNDER THIS HEAD:
(1)Income chargeable only under the head "Income from Other Sources":	
(i)Dividend income [Section 56(2)(i)]:Dividend income is always taxable under the head ―Income from other sources. The term dividend‘ as used in the Act has a wider scope and meaning than under the general law.
Dividend [covered by sections 2(22)(a) to (e)]:According to section 2(22), the following receipts are deemed to be dividend:
(a)Distribution of accumulated profits, entailing the release of company‟s assets - Any distribution of accumulated profits, whether capitalised or not, by a company to its shareholders is dividend if it entails the release of all or any part of its assets.
Note: If accumulated profits are distributed in cash, it is dividend in the hands of the share- holders. Where accumulated profits are distributed in kind, for example by delivery of shares etc. entailing the release of company‘s assets, the market value of such shares on the date of such distribution is deemed dividend in the hands of the shareholder.
(b)Distribution of debentures, deposit certificates to shareholders and bonus shares to preference shareholders - Any distribution to its shareholders by a company of debenture, debenture stock or deposit certificate in any form, whether with or without interest, and any distribution of bonus shares to preference shareholders to the extent to which the company possesses accumulated profits, whether capitalised or not, will be deemed as dividend.
The market value of such bonus shares is deemed as dividend in the hands of the preference shareholder.
In the case of debentures, debenture stock etc., their value is to be taken at the market rate and if there is no market rate they should be valued according to accepted principles of valuation.
Note: Bonus shares given to equity shareholders are not treated as dividend.
(c)Distribution on liquidation - Any distribution made to the shareholders of a company on its liquidation, to the extent to which the distribution is attributable to the accumulated profits of the company immediately before its liquidation, whether capitalised or not, is deemed to be dividend income.
Note: Any distribution made out of the profits of the company after the date of the liquidation cannot amount to dividend. It is a repayment towards capital.
(d)Distribution on reduction of capital - Any distribution to its shareholders by a company on the reduction of its capital, to the extent to which the company possessed accumulated profits, whether capitalised or not, shall be deemed to be dividend.
(e)Advance or loan by a closely held company to its shareholder – Any payment by a company in which the public are not substantially interested of any sum by way of advance or loan to any shareholder who is the beneficial owner of 10% or more of the voting power of the company will be deemed to be dividend to the extent of the accumulated profits. If the loan is not covered by the accumulated profits, it is not deemed to be dividend.
 
Advance or loan by a closely held company to a specified concern - Any payment by a company in which the public are not substantially interested, to any concern (i.e. HUF/ Firm/ AOP/ BOI/ Company) in which a shareholder, having the beneficial ownership of at least 10% of the equity shares is a member or a partner and in which he has a substantial interest (i.e. atleast 20% share of the income of the concern) will be deemed to be dividend .
Also, any payments by such a closely held company on behalf of, or for the individual benefit of any such shareholder will also be deemed to be dividend. However, in both cases the ceiling limit of dividend is to the extent of accumulated profits.
Exceptions: The following payments or loan given would not be deemed as dividend:
(i)Loan granted in the ordinary course of business - If the loan is granted in the ordinary course of its business and lending of money is a substantial part of the company‘s business, the loan or advance to a shareholder or to the specified concern is not deemed to be dividend.
(ii)Dividend paid is set off against the deemed dividend - Where a loan had been treated as dividend and subsequently, the company declares and distributes dividend to all its shareholders including the borrowing shareholder, and the dividend so paid is set off by the company against the previous borrowing, the adjusted amount will not be again treated as a dividend.
Note: Subsequent repayment of loan or charge of interest at market rate does not make any difference in the applicability of section 2(22)(e).
Other exceptions

Apart from the exceptions cited above, the following also do not constitute ―dividend-
(i)Distribution in respect of non-participating shares issued for full cash consideration – Any distribution made in accordance with (c) or (d) in respect of any share issued for full cash consideration and the holder of such share is not entitled to participate in the surplus asset in the event of liquidation.
(ii)Payment on buy back of shares - Any payment made by a company on purchase of its own shares from a shareholder in accordance with the provisions of section 77A of the Companies Act, 2013.
(iii)Distribution of shares to the shareholders on demerger by the resulting company - Any distribution of shares on demerger by the resulting company to the shareholders of the demerged company (whether or not there is a reduction of capital in the demerged company).

Meaning of “accumulated profits”:Accumulated profits in point (a), (b), (d) and (e) above include all profits of the company up to the date of distribution or payment of dividend.
Building & Machinery Depreciation fund not to be included in accumulated profits. - CIT v. Jaldu Rama Rao (1983) 140 ITR 168 (Andhra Pradesh)
Accumulated profits include in point (c) all profits of the company up to the date of liquidation whether capitalised or not. But where liquidation is consequent to the compulsory acquisition of an undertaking by the Government or by any corporation owned or controlled by the Government, the accumulated profits do not include any profits of the company prior to the 3 successive previous years immediately preceding the previous year in which such acquisition took place.
In the case of an amalgamated company, the accumulated profits, whether capitalized or not, of the amalgamating company on the date of amalgamation shall be included in the accumulated profits, whether capitalized or not or loss, as the case may be, of the amalgamated company.

Clarification regarding trade advance not to be treated as deemed dividend under section 2(22)(e) – [Circular No. 19/2017, dated 12.06.2017]: Section 2(22)(e) provides that "dividend" includes any payment by a company in which public are not substantially interested, of any sum by way of advance or loan to a shareholder who is the beneficial owner of shares holding not less than 10% of the voting power, or to any concern in which such shareholder is a member or a partner and in which he has a substantial interest or any payment by any such company on behalf, or for the individual benefit, of any such shareholder, to the extent to which the company in either case possesses accumulated profits.
The CBDT observed that some Courts in the recent past have held that trade advances in the nature of commercial transactions would not fall within the ambit of the provisions of section 2(22)(e) and such views have attained finality. Some illustrations /examples of trade advances/commercial transactions held to be not covered under section 2(22)(e) are as follows:
(i)Advances were made by a company to a sister concern and adjusted against the dues for job work done by the sister concern. It was held that amounts advanced for business transactions do not to fall within the definition of deemed dividend under section 2(22)(e) [CIT vs. Creative Dyeing & Printing Pvt. Ltd. [NJRS] 2009-LL-0922-2, ITA No. 250 of 2009, Delhi High Court].
(ii)Advance was made by a company to its shareholder to install plant and machinery at the shareholder's premises to enable him to do job work for the company so that the company could fulfil an export order. It was held that as the assessee proved business expediency, the advance was not covered by section 2(22)(e) [CIT vs Amrik Singh, [NJRS] 2015-LL-0429-5, ITA No. 347 of 2013, P & H High Court]
(iii)A floating security deposit was given by a company to its sister concern against the use of electricity generators belonging to the sister concern. The company utilised gas available to it from GAIL to generate electricity and supplied it to the sister concern at concessional rates. It was held that the security deposit made by the company to its sister concern was a business transaction arising in the normal course of business between two concerns and the transaction did not attract section 2(22)(e) [CIT, Agra vs Atul Engineering Udyog, [NJRS] 2014-LL-0926-121, ITA No. 223 of 2011, Allahabad High Court]
In view of the above, the CBDT has, vide this circular, clarified that it is a settled position that trade advances, which are in the nature of commercial transactions, would not fall within the ambit of the word 'advance' in section 2(22)(e) and therefore, the same would not to be treated as deemed dividend.

Section 8:Basis of charge of dividend:Dividend declared or distributed or paid by a company is deemed to be the income of the shareholder in the previous year in which it is so declared or distributed or paid, as the case may be.
-Deemed dividend u/s 2(22)(a)/(b)/(c)/(d) – Distribution by a company which is deemed as dividend u/s 2(22)(a)/(b)/(c)/(d) would be the income of the previous year in which it is so distributed.
-Deemed dividend u/s 2(22)(e) – Payment of advance or loan to a shareholder or a concern, as the case may be, which is deemed as dividend u/s 2(22)(e) will be the income of the previous year in which it is so paid.
-Interim dividend – Interim dividend would be deemed to be the income of the previous year in which such dividend is unconditionally made available by the company to the members who are entitled to it.
-Tax rate on dividend income - Any income by way of dividend received by a resident from a company, whether domestic or foreign, is taxable in the hands of shareholder at normal rates of tax.

ILLUSTRATION:Dhaval is in business of manufacturing customized kitchen equipments. He is also the Managing Director and held nearly 65% of the paid-up share capital of Aarav (P) Ltd. A substantial part of the business of Dhaval is obtained through Aarav (P) Ltd. For this purpose, Aarav (P) Ltd. passed on the advance received from its customers to Dhaval to execute the job work entrusted to him. The Assessing Officer held that the advance money received by Dhaval is in the nature of loan given by Aarav (P) Ltd. to him and accordingly is deemed dividend within the meaning of provisions of section 2(22)(e) of the Income-tax Act, 1961. The Assessing Officer, therefore, made the addition by treating advance money as deemed dividend.
Examine whether the action of the Assessing Officer is tenable in law.
Answer:As per section 2(22)(e), in case a company, not being a company in which the public are substantially interested, makes payment of any sum by way of advance or loan to a shareholder holding not less than 10% of voting power/share capital of the company, then, the payment so made shall be deemed to be dividend in the hands of such shareholder to the extent to which the company possesses accumulated profits.In the present case, Dhaval is holding 65% of the paid-up capital of Aarav (P) Ltd. Aarav (P) Ltd. has passed on advance received from its customers to Dhaval for execution of job work entrusted to Dhaval. Since Aarav (P) Ltd. is not a company in which public are substantially interested, the applicability of the provisions of section 2(22)(e) in respect of such transaction has to be examined. In CIT v. Rajkumar (2009) 318 ITR 462 (Del.), it was held that trade advance given to the shareholder which is in the nature of money transacted to give effect to a commercial transaction, would not amount to deemed dividend under section 2(22)(e). The Delhi High Court ruling in CIT v. Ambassador Travels (P) Ltd. (2009) 318 ITR 376 also supports the above view.In the present case, the payment is made to Dhaval by Aarav (P) Ltd. for execution of work is in the course of commercial business transaction and therefore, it cannot be treated as deemed dividend under section 2(22)(e). Hence, the action of the Assessing Officer is not tenable in law.

Note – This can also be answered on the basis of Circular No. 19/2017, dated 12.06.2017. The CBDT has, in its circular clarified that it is a settled position that trade advances, which are in the nature of commercial transactions, would not fall within the ambit of the word ' advance' in section 2(22)(e) and therefore, the same would not to be treated as deemed dividend. Since, the payment is made to Dhaval by Aarav (P) Ltd. for execution of work is in the course of commercial business transaction and therefore, the advance cannot be treated as deemed dividend under section 2(22)(e). Hence, the action of the Assessing Officer is not tenable in law.

ILLUSTRATION:MNO (P) Ltd. is a company in which the public are not substantially interested. K is a shareholder of the company holding 15% of the equity shares. The accumulated profits of the company as on 1.10.2023 amounted to ` 10,00,000. The company lent ` 1,00,000 to K by an account payee bank draft on 1.10.2023. The loan was not connected with the business of the company. K repaid the loan to the company by an account payee bank draft on 30.3.2024. Examine the effect of the borrowal and repayment of the loan by K on the computation of his total income for the assessment year 2024-25.
Answer:As per section 2(22)(e), any payment by a company, in which the public are not substantially interested, by way of advance or loan to a shareholder, being a person who is the beneficial owner of shares holding not less than 10% of the voting power, shall be treated as dividend to the extent to which the company possesses accumulated profits.
In the instant case, MNO (P) Ltd. is a company in which the public are not substantially interested. The company has accumulated profits of ` 10,00,000 on 1.10.2023. The loan given by the company to K was not in the course of its business. K holds more than 10% of the equity shares in the company. Therefore, assuming that K has voting power equivalent to his shareholding, section 2(22)(e) comes into play. Deemed dividend of ` 1,00,000 under section 2(22)(e) would be taxable in the hands of Mr. K at normal rates of tax.
Under section 2(22)(e), the liability arises the moment the loan is borrowed by the shareholder and it is immaterial whether the loan is repaid before the end of the accounting year or not. Therefore, the repayment of loan by K to the company on 30.3.2024 will not affect the taxability of the sum of 1,00,000 as deemed dividend.


(ii)Casual Income [Section 56(2)(ib)]:Casual income means income in the nature of winning from lotteries, crossword puzzles, races including horse races, card games and other games of any sort, gambling, betting etc. Such winnings are chargeable to tax at a flat rate of 30% under the head ―Income from Other Sources.
 
(iii)Consideration received in excess of FMV of shares issued by a closely held company to be treated as income of such company, where shares are issued at a premium [Section 56(2)(viib)]
(a)Section 56(2)(viib) brings to tax the consideration received from a person by a company, other than a company in which public are substantially interested, which is in excess of the fair market value (FMV) of shares. The person from whom the consideration is received may be a resident or non-resident.
(b)Such excess is to be treated as the income of a closely held company taxable under section 56(2) under the head ―Income from Other Sources‖, in cases where consideration received for issue of shares exceeds the face value of shares i.e. where shares are issued at a premium i.e., (Issue price of share – FMV of such share) x No. of shares.
(c)Fair market value of the shares shall be the higher of, the value as may be –
(1)determined in accordance with the prescribed method; or
(2)substantiated by the company to the satisfaction of the Assessing Officer, based on the value of its assets on the date of issue of shares.
For the purpose of computation of FMV, the value of assets would include the value of intangible assets being goodwill, know-how, patents, copyrights, trademarks, licences, franchises or any other business or commercial rights of similar nature.

Examples:1)In case of A(P) Ltd., suppose no.of shares is 10,000 and face value is 100, Fair market value(FMV) is 120 and Issue price of shares is 130.The provisions of section 56(2)(viib) are attracted in this case since the shares are issued at a premium (i.e., issue price exceeds the face value of shares). The excess of the issue price of the shares over the FMV would be
taxable  under  section  56(2)(viib). 1,00,000 [10,000 × 10 (130 -120)] shall be treated as income in the hands of A (P) Ltd.
2)In case of B(P) Ltd., suppose no.of shares is 20,000 and face value is 100, Fair market value(FMV) is 120 and Issue price of shares is 110.The provisions of section 56(2)(viib) are attracted since the shares are issued at a premium. However, no sum shall be chargeable to tax in the hands of B (P) Ltd. under the said section as the shares are issued at a price less
than the FMV of shares.
3)In case of C(P) Ltd., suppose no.of shares is 30,000 and face value is 100, Fair market value(FMV) is 90 and Issue price of shares is 98.Section 56(2)(viib) is not attracted since the shares are issued at a discount,  though  the  issue price is greater than the FMV.
4)In case of D(P) Ltd., suppose no.of shares is 40,000 and face value is 100, Fair market value(FMV) is 90 and Issue price of shares is 110.The provisions of section 56(2)(viib) are attracted in this case since the shares are issued at a premium. The excess of the issue price of the shares over the FMV would be taxable under section 56(2)(viib).Therefore, 8,00,000 [40,000 × 20 (110 - 90)] shall be treated as income in the hands of D (P) Ltd.

(d)However, these provisions would not be attracted where consideration for issue of shares is received:
(1)by a Venture Capital Undertaking (VCU) from a Venture Capital Fund (VCF) or Venture Capital Company (VCC) or a specified fund;
―Specified Fund‖ means a fund established or incorporated in India in the form of a trust or a company or a limited liability partnership or a body corporate which has been granted a certificate of registration as a Category I or a Category II Alternative Investment Fund and is regulated under the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Alternative Investment Fund) Regulations, 2012 made under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 or regulated under the IFSC Authority (Fund Management) Regulations, 2022 made under the IFSC Authority Act, 2019.
"Trust" means a trust established under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or under any other law for the time being in force;
(2)	by a company from a class or classes of persons as notified by the Central Government for this purpose.
Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. 29/2023, dated 24.03.2023, notified that the provisions of section 56(2)(viib) shall not apply to consideration received by a company for issue of shares that exceeds the face value of such shares, if the said consideration is received from the following categories of persons –
(i)	Government and Government related investors such as central banks, sovereign wealth funds, international or multilateral organizations or agencies including entities controlled by the Government or where direct or indirect ownership of the Government is 75% or more;
(ii)	Banks or Entities involved in Insurance Business, where such entity is subject to applicable regulations in the country where it is established or incorporated or is a resident;
(iii)	Any of the following entities, which is a resident of specified country or specified territory, and such entity is subject to applicable regulations in the country where it is established or incorporated or is a resident :–
(a)	entities registered with SEBI as Category-I FPI;
(b)	endowment funds associated with a university, hospitals or charities;
(c)	pension funds created or established under the law of the foreign country or specified territory;
(d)	Broad Based Pooled Investment Vehicle or fund where the number of investors in such vehicle or fund is more than 50 and such fund is not a hedge fund or a fund which employs diverse or complex trading strategies.
 
Further, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. 30/2023, dated 24-05-2023, notified that the provisions of section 56(2)(viib) shall not apply to consideration received by a company for issue of shares that exceeds the face value of such shares, if the said consideration received from any person, by a company which fulfills the conditions specified by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry in the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade and files the declaration referred to in the said notification. In effect, vide this notification, the Central Government has notified the conditions to be fulfilled by a company which issues shares rather than the class or classes of persons to whom such shares are issued.
The Ministry of Commerce and Industry in the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade has, vide Notification No. G.S.R. 127(E) dated 19.2.2019, specified in para 4 thereunder, that a startup shall be eligible for exemption under clause (ii) of the proviso to section 56(2)(viib), if it fulfills the following conditions:
(i)	It has been recognized by the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade as start up as per this notification or any earlier notification on the subject.
(ii)	Aggregate amount of paid up capital and share premium of the startup after issue or proposed issue of shares, if any, does not exceed, ` 25 crore.
However, in computing the aggregate amount of paid up share capital, the amount of paid up share capital and share premium of ` 25 crore in respect of shares issued to any of the following persons shall not be included:
(a)	a non-resident
(b)	a venture capital company or a venture capital fund
Further, consideration received by such startup for shares issued or proposed to be issued to a specified company shall also be exempt and shall not be included in computing the aggregate amount of paid up share capital and share premium of ` 25 crore. For this purpose, a specified company means a company whose shares are frequently traded within the meaning of SEBI (Substantial Acquisition of Shares and Takeovers) Regulations, 2011 and whose net worth on the last date of financial year preceding the year in which shares are issued exceeds ` 100 crore or turnover for the financial year preceding the year in which shares are issued exceeds ` 250 crore.
 
(iii)It has not invested in any of the following assets –
(a)building or land appurtenant thereto, being a residential house, other than that used by the Startup for the purposes of renting or held by it as stock-in-trade, in the ordinary course of business;
(b)land or building, or both, not being a residential house, other than that occupied by the Startup for its business or used by it for purposes of renting or held by it as stock-in trade, in the ordinary course of business;
(c)loans and advances, other than loans or advances extended in the ordinary course of business by the Startup where the lending of money is substantial part of its business;
(d)capital contribution made to any other entity;
(e)shares and securities;
(f)a motor vehicle, aircraft, yacht or any other mode of transport, the actual cost of which exceeds ten lakh rupees, other than that held by the Startup for the purpose of plying, hiring, leasing or as stock-in-trade, in the ordinary course of business;
(g)jewellery other than that held by the Startup as stock-in-trade in the ordinary course of business;
(h)any other asset, whether in the nature of capital asset or otherwise, of the nature specified in section 56(2)(vii)(d)(iv) to (ix) i.e., archaeological collections, drawings, paintings, sculptures, any work of art or bullion.
However, the Startup should not invest in any of the assets mentioned above for the period of 7 years from the end of the latest financial year in which shares are issued at premium;
Meaning of Startup:A company would be considered as Startup if the following conditions are satisfied:
(a)Period – It would be considered as a Startup upto a period of 10 years from the date of incorporation/ registration, if it is incorporated as a private limited company (as defined in the Companies Act, 2013) in India.
(b)Turnover limit - Turnover of the company for any of the financial years since incorporation/registration has not exceeded ` 100 crore.
(c)Object and Purposes - The company is working towards innovation, development or improvement of products or processes or services, or if it is a scalable business model with a high potential of employment generation or wealth creation. However,  a  private  limited  company  shall  not  be  considered  a Startup, if it formed by splitting up or reconstruction of an existing business.

Note: It may, however, be noted that where the provisions of section 56(2)(viib) have not been applied to a company on account of fulfilment of conditions specified in the above notification and such company fails to comply with any of those conditions, then, any consideration received for issue of share that exceeds the fair market value of such share shall be deemed to be the income of that company chargeable to income-tax for the previous year in which such failure has taken place. Further, it shall also be deemed that the company has under-reported the income in consequence of the misreporting referred to in section 270A(8) and 270A(9) for the said previous year. Consequently, penalty @200% of tax payable on under-reported income would be leviable.

(iv)Interest received on compensation/ enhanced compensation deemed to be income in the year of receipt and taxable under the head “Income from Other Sources” [Section 56(2)(viii)]:
(a)As per section 145(1), income chargeable under the head ―Profits and gains of business or profession‖ or ―Income from other sources‖, shall be computed in accordance with either cash or mercantile system of accounting regularly employed by the assessee.
(b)Section 145B(1) provides that notwithstanding anything contained in section 145(1), the interest received by an assessee on compensation or on enhanced compensation shall be deemed to be his income of the previous year in which it is received, irrespective of the method of accounting followed by the assessee.
(c)Section 56(2)(viii) provides that income by way of interest received on compensation or on enhanced compensation referred to in section 145B(1) shall be assessed as ―Income from other sources‖ in the year in which it is received.
 
(v)Advance forfeited due to failure of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset to be taxable as “Income from other sources” [Section 56(2)(ix)]:
(a)Prior to A.Y.2015-16, any advance retained or received in respect of a negotiation for transfer which failed to materialise is reduced from the cost of acquisition of the asset or the written down value or the fair market value of the asset, at the time of its transfer to compute the capital gains arising therefrom as per section 51. In case the asset transferred is a long-term capital asset, indexation benefit would be on the cost so reduced.
(b)With effect from A.Y.2015-16, section 56(2)(ix) provides for the taxability of any sum of money, received as an advance or otherwise in the course of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset. Such sum shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head ‗Income from other sources‘, if such sum is forfeited and the negotiations do not result in transfer of such capital asset.
(c)In order to avoid double taxation of the advance received and retained, section 51 was amended to provide that where any sum of money received as an advance or otherwise in the course of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset, has been included in the total income of the assessee for any previous year, in accordance with section 56(2)(ix), such amount shall not be deducted from the cost for which the asset was acquired or the written down value or the fair market value, as the case may be, in computing the cost of acquisition.
(d)It may be noted that advance received and forfeited upto 31.3.2014 has to be reduced from cost of acquisition while computing capital gains, since such advance would not have been subject to tax under section 56(2)(ix). Only the advance received and forfeited on or after 1.4.2014 would be subject to tax under section 56(2)(ix). Hence, such advance would not be reduced from the cost of acquisition for computing capital gains.

As per section 51, Tax treatment of advance money Received and forfeited before 01.04.2014 is Advance forfeited to be deducted from cost of acquisiton for computing capital gains in the year of actual trasnfer of asset.If advance money Received and forfeited after 01.04.2014,Taxable under "Income from Other Sources" in the year of forfeiture of advance.

(vi)Any sum of money or value of property received without consideration or for inadequate consideration to be subject to tax in the hands of the recipient [Section 56(2)(x)]
In order to prevent the practice of receiving sum of money or the property without consideration or for inadequate consideration, section 56(2)(x) brings to tax any sum of money or the value of any property received by any person without consideration or the value of any property received for inadequate consideration.
(a)Sum of Money: If any sum of money is received without consideration and the aggregate value of which exceeds 50,000, the whole of the aggregate value of such sum is chargeable to tax.
(b)Immovable property [Land or building or both]:
I.If an immovable property is received
(a)Without consideration: the stamp duty value of such property would be taxed as the income of the recipient, if it exceeds 50,000.
(b)For Inadequate consideration: If consideration is less than the stamp duty value of the property and the difference between the stamp duty value and consideration is more than the higher of –
(i)50,000 and
(ii)10% of consideration,
the difference between the stamp duty value and the consideration shall be chargeable to tax in the hands of the assessee as ―Income from other sources.
It may be noted that the above limit shall be considered for each property separately.
 
II.Value of property to be considered where the date of agreement is different from date of registration: Taking into consideration the possible time gap between the date of agreement and the date of registration, the stamp duty value may be taken as on the date of agreement instead of the date of registration, if the date of the agreement fixing the amount of consideration for the transfer of the immovable property and the date of registration are not the same, provided whole or part of the consideration has been paid by way of an account payee cheque or an account payee bank draft or by use of electronic clearing system (ECS) through a bank account or through such prescribed electronic mode on or before the date of agreement.
The prescribed electronic modes notified are credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay as other electronic modes of payment [CBDT Notification No. 8/2020 dated 29.01.2020].

III.If the stamp duty value of immovable property is disputed by the assessee, the Assessing Officer may refer the valuation of such property to a Valuation Officer. In such a case, the provisions of section 50C and section 155(15) shall, as far as may be, apply for determining the value of such property. As per section 50C, if such value is less than the stamp duty value, the same would be taken for determining the value of such property, for computation of income under this head in the hands of the buyer.
(c)Movable Property [Property other than immovable property]:
If movable property is received
(i)Without consideration: The aggregate fair market value of such property on the date of receipt would be taxed as the income of the recipient, if it exceeds ` 50,000.
(ii)For inadequate consideration: If the difference between the aggregate fair market value and such consideration exceeds ` 50,000, such difference would be taxed as the income of the recipient.
(d)Applicability of section 56(2)(x): The provisions of section 56(2)(x) would apply only to the specified property which is the nature of a capital asset of the recipient and not stock-in- trade, raw material or consumable stores of any business of the recipient. Therefore, only transfer of a specified capital asset, without consideration or for inadequate consideration would attract the provisions of section 56(2)(x).


To summarise it-
-Money=The whole amount if the same exceeds Rs 50,000.
-Movable property=(i)Without consideration: The aggregate fair market value of the property, if it exceeds 50,000.
(ii)Inadequate consideration:The difference between the aggregate fair market value and the consideration, if such difference exceeds Rs50,000. transfer of a specified capital asset, without consideration or for inadequate consideration would attract the provisions of section 56(2)(x).
-Immovable property=(i)Without consideration: The stamp value of the property, if it exceeds Rs 50,000.
(ii)Inadequate consideration: The difference between the stamp duty value and the consideration, if such difference is more than the higher of
Rs 50,000 and 10% of consideration.


(f)Non-applicability of section 56(2)(x): However, any sum of money or value of property received in the following circumstances would be outside the ambit of section 56(2)(x) -
(i)from any relative; or
(ii)on the occasion of the marriage of the individual; or
(iii)under a will or by way of inheritance; or
(iv)in contemplation of death of the payer or donor, as the case may be; or
(v)from any local authority as defined in the Explanation to section 10(20); or
(vi)from any fund or foundation or university or other educational institution or hospital or other medical institution or any trust or institution referred to in section 10(23C); or
(vii)from or by any trust or institution registered under section 12A or section 12AA or section 12AB; or
However, where sum of money or property has been received by specified persons under section 13(3), this relaxation is not available and section 56(2)(x) would be applicable.

(viii)by any fund or trust or institution or any university or other educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution referred to in Section 10(23C)(iv)/(v)/ (vi)/(via).
(ix)by way of transaction not regarded as transfer under section 47(i)/(iv)/(v)/(vi)/(via)/ (viaa)/(vib)/(vic)/(vica)/(vicb)/(vid)/(vii)/(viiac)/(viiad)/(viiae)/(viiaf).
(x)from an individual by a trust created or established solely for the benefit of relative of the individual.
(xi)by an individual, from any person, in respect of any expenditure actually incurred by him on his medical treatment or treatment of any member of his family, for any illness related to COVID-19 subject to conditions notified by the Central Government.

Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. 91/2022 dated 5.8.2022, specified the following conditions –
The individual has to keep a record of the following documents, namely:-
(a)the COVID-19 positive report of the individual or his family member, or medical report if clinically determined to be COVID-19 positive through investigations in a hospital or an in-patient facility by a treating physician for a person so admitted;
(b)all necessary documents of medical diagnosis or treatment of the individual or family member due to COVID-19 or illness related to COVID-19 suffered within 6 months from the date of being determined as a COVID-19 positive;
The details of the amount so received in any financial year has to be furnished in Form No. 1 to the Income-tax Department within 9 months from the end of such financial year.
(xii)by a member of the family of a deceased person –
(A)from the employer of the deceased person (without any limit); or
(B)from any other person or persons to the extent that such sum or aggregate of
such sums ≤ ` 10 lakhs,
where the cause of death of such person is illness related to COVID-19 and the payment is –
(i)received within 12 months from the date of death of such person; and
(ii)subject to such other conditions notified by the Central Government.
Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. 92/2022 dated 5.8.2022, specified the following conditions –
1.(i)  the death of the individual should be within 6 months from the date of testing positive or from the date of being clinically determined as a COVID- 19 case, for which any sum of money has been received by the member of the family;
(ii)the family member of the individual has to keep a record of the following documents,
(a)the COVID-19 positive report of the individual, or medical report if clinically determined to be COVID-19 positive through investigations in a hospital or an inpatient facility by a treating physician;
(b)a medical report or death certificate issued by a medical practitioner or a Government civil registration office, in which it is stated that death of the person is related to corona virus disease (COVID-19).
2.The details of such amount received in any financial year has to be furnished in Form A to the Assessing Officer within 9 months from the end of such financial year.

(xiii)from such class of persons and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed.


Accordingly, CBDT has inserted Rule 11UAC to notify that the provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not be applicable to the following transactions –
1)Any immovable property, being land or building or both received by a resident of an unauthorized colony in the National Capital Territory of Delhi. where the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazettee, regularised the transactions of such immovable property based on the latest Power of Attorney, Agreement to Sale, Will, possession letter and other documents including documents evidencing payment of consideration for conferring or recognising right of ownership or transfer or mortgage in regard to such immovable property in favour of such resident.
-Resident means a person having physical possession of property on the basis of a registered sale deed or latest set of Power of Attorney, Agreement to Sale, Will, possession letter and other documents including documents evidencing payment of consideration in respect of a property in unauthorised colonies and includes their legal heirs but does not include tenant, licensee or permissive user.
-Unauthorised colony means a colony or development comprising of a contiguous area, where no permission has been obtained for approval of layout plan or building plans and has been identified for regularisation of such colony in pursuance to the notification number S.O. 683(E), dated the 24th March, 2008, of the Delhi Development Authority.

2)Any movable property, being unquoted shares, of a company and its subsidiary and the subsidiary of such subsidiary received by Shareholder, Where,
(i)the Tribunal, on an application moved by the Central Government under section 241 of the Companies Act, 2013, has suspended the Board of Directors of such company and has appointed new directors nominated by the Central Government under section 242 of the said Act; and
(ii)share of company and its subsidiary and the subsidiary of such subsidiary has been received pursuant to a resolution plan approved by the Tribunal under section 242 of the Companies Act, 2013 after affording a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the jurisdictional	Principal Commissioner or Commissioner.
A company shall be a subsidiary of another company, if such other company holds more than half in nominal value of the equity share capital of the company;

3)Any movable property, being equity shares, of the reconstructed bank received by Investor or investor bank (SBI), where the said share has been allotted by the reconstructed bank (Yes Bank) under the Yes Bank Limited Reconstruction Scheme, 2020 at Rs10 per share (Face value - Rs2 per share; Premium - Rs8 per share).

4)Any movable property, being equity shares, of a public sector company or a company received by a person,It should be received from a public sector company or the Central Government or any State Government under strategic disinvestment.
Strategic disinvestment - Sale of shareholding by the Central Government or any State Government or a public sector company, in a public sector company or in a company, which results in
-reduction of its shareholding to below 51% and
-transfer of control to the buyer.
The condition of reduction below 51% would apply only in a case where shareholding of the Central Government or the State Government or the public sector company was above 51% before such sale of shareholding. The requirement of transfer of control may be carried out by the Central Government or the State Government or the public sector company or any two of them or all of them.

5)Any movable property, being shares or	units or interest in the resultant fund received by The	fund management entity	of the resultant fund, It should be received in lieu of shares or units or interest held by the investment manager entity in the original fund, pursuant to the relocation, subject to the following conditions, namely –
(i)not less than 90% of shares or units or interest in the fund management entity of the resultant fund are held by the same entity(ies) or person(s) in the same proportion as held by them in the investment manager entity of the original fund; and
(ii)not less than 90% of the aggregate of shares or units or interest in the investment manager entity of the original fund was held by such entity(ies) or person(s).


Meaning of Certain Terms:
-Property=A capital asset of the assessee, namely,-
(a)immovable property being land or building or both,
(b)shares and securities,
(c)jewellery,
(d)archaeological collections,
(e)drawings,
(f)paintings,
(g)sculptures,
(h)any work of art or bullion.
It also includes virtual digital asset.

-Relative=(a)In case of an individual –
(i)spouse of the individual;
(ii)brother or sister of the individual;
(iii)brother or sister of the spouse of the individual;
(iv)brother or sister of either of the parents of the individual;
(v)any lineal ascendant or descendant of the individual;
(vi)any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the individual;
(vii)spouse of any of the persons referred to above.
(b)In case of Hindu Undivided Family, any member thereof


-Family=For the purpose of (xi) and (xii), family, in relation to an individual means
(i)the spouse and children of the individual; and
(ii)the parents, brothers and sisters of the individual or any of them, wholly or mainly dependent on the individual


Illustration:Mr. A, a dealer in shares, received the following without consideration during the P.Y. 2023-24 from his friend Mr. B, -
(1)Cash gift of ` 75,000 on his anniversary, 15th April, 2023.
(2)Bullion, the fair market value of which was ` 60,000, on his birthday, 19th June, 2023.
(3)A plot of land at Faridabad on 1st July, 2023, the stamp value of which is ` 5 lakh on that date. Mr. B had purchased the land in April, 2009.
Mr. A purchased from his friend Mr. C, who is also a dealer in shares, 1000 shares of X Ltd. @ ` 400 each on 19th June, 2023, the fair market value of which was ` 600 each on that date. Mr. A sold these shares in the course of his business on 23rd June, 2023. Further, on 1st November, 2023, Mr. A took possession of property (building) booked by him two years back at ` 20 lakh. The stamp duty value of the property as on 1st November, 2023 was ` 32 lakh and on the date of booking was ` 23 lakh. He had paid ` 1 lakh by account payee cheque as down payment on the date of booking. On 1st March, 2024, he sold the plot of land at Faridabad for ` 7 lakh. Compute the income of Mr. A chargeable under the head “Income from other sources” and “Capital Gains” for A.Y.2024-25.
Answer:
-Cash gift is taxable under section 56(2)(x), since it exceeds ` 50,000 = 75000
-Since bullion is included in the definition of property, therefore, when bullion is received without consideration, the same is taxable, since the aggregate fair market value exceeds ` 50,000=60,000
-Stamp value of plot of land at Faridabad, received without consideration, is taxable under section 56(2)(x)=5,00,000
-Difference of ` 2 lakh in the value of shares of X Ltd. purchased from Mr. C, a dealer in shares, is not taxable as it represents the stock-in-trade of Mr. A. Since Mr. A is a dealer in shares and it has been mentioned that the shares were subsequently sold in the course of his business, such shares represent the stock-in-trade of Mr. A.

-Difference between the stamp duty value of ` 23 lakh on the date of booking and the actual consideration of ` 20 lakh paid is taxable under section 56(2)(x) since the difference exceeds ` 1 lakh being, the higher of ` 50,000 and 10% of consideration.=3,00,000

Income from other sources = 9,35,000

Computation of capital Gain: Sale Consideration[7,00,000]-Cost of acquisition [deemed to be the stamp value charged to tax under section 56(2)(x) as per section 49(4)][5,00,000] = Short-term capital gains[2,00,000].
Note – The resultant capital gains will be short-term capital gains since for calculating the period of holding, the period of holding of previous owner is not to be considered.


Illustartion:Discuss the taxability or otherwise of the following in the hands of the recipient under section 56(2)(x) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 -
(i)Akhil HUF received ` 75,000 in cash from niece of Akhil (i.e., daughter of Akhil’s sister). Akhil is the Karta of the HUF.= Amount of 75,000 is taxable as Sum of money exceeding ` 50,000 received without consideration from a non-relative is taxable under section 56(2)(x). Daughter of Mr. Akhil‘s sister is not a relative of Akhil HUF, since she is not a member of Akhil HUF.
(ii)Nitisha, a member of her father’s HUF, transferred a house property to the HUF without consideration. The stamp duty value of the house property is 9,00,000. = It is non-taxable as Immovable property received without consideration by a HUF from its relative is not taxable under section 56(2)(x). Since Nitisha is a member of the HUF, she is a relative of the HUF. However, income from such asset would be included in the hands of Nitisha under 64(2).
(iii)Mr. Akshat received 100 shares of A Ltd. from his friend as a gift on occasion of his 25 th marriage anniversary. The fair market value on that date was ` 100 per share. He also received jewellery worth ` 45,000 (FMV) from his nephew on the same day.= amount of 55,000 is taxable as As per provisions of section 56(2)(x), in case the aggregate fair market value of property, other than immovable property, received without consideration exceeds ` 50,000, the whole of the aggregate value shall be taxable. In this case, the aggregate fair market value of shares (` 10,000) and jewellery (` 45,000) exceeds ` 50,000. Hence, the entire amount of ` 55,000 shall be taxable.
(iv)Kishan HUF gifted a car to son of Karta for achieving good marks in XII board examination. The fair market value of the car is ` 5,25,000.=It is non-taxable as Car is not included in the definition of property for the purpose of section 56(2)(x), therefore, the same shall not be taxable.


Illustration:Mr. Hari, a property dealer, sold a building in the course of his business to his friend Mr. Rajesh, who is a dealer in automobile spare parts, for ` 90 lakh on 1.1.2024, when the stamp duty value was 150 lakh. The agreement was, however, entered into on 1.9.2023 when the stamp duty value was 140 lakh. Mr. Hari had received a down payment of ` 15 lakh by a crossed cheque from Mr. Rajesh on the date of agreement. Discuss the tax implications in the hands of Mr. Hari and Mr. Rajesh, assuming that Mr. Hari has purchased the building for ` 75 lakh on 12th July, 2022. Would your answer be different if Hari was a share broker instead of a property dealer?
Solution:
Case 2: Tax implications if Mr. Hari is a property dealer-
-in the hands of Mr. Hari, In the hands of Hari, the provisions of section 43CA would be attracted, since the building represents his stock-in-trade and he has transferred the same for a consideration less than the stamp duty value; and the stamp duty value exceeds 110% of consideration. Under section 43CA, the option to adopt the stamp duty value on the date of agreement can be exercised only if whole or part of the consideration has been received on or before the date of agreement by way of account payee cheque or draft or by use of ECS through a bank account or through credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay on or before the date of agreement. In this case, since the down payment of ` 15 lakh is received on the date of agreement by crossed cheque and not account payee cheque, the option cannot be exercised. Therefore, ` 75 lakh, being the difference between the stamp duty value on the date of transfer i.e., ` 150 lakh, and the purchase price i.e., ` 75 lakh, would be chargeable as business income in the hands of Mr. Hari, since stamp duty value exceeds 110% of the consideration.
-In the hands of Mr. Rajesh,Since Mr. Rajesh is a dealer in automobile spare parts, the building purchased would be a capital asset in his hands. The provisions of section 56(2)(x) would be attracted in the hands of Mr. Rajesh who has received immovable property, being a capital asset, for inadequate consideration and the difference between the consideration and stamp duty value exceeds ` 9,00,000, being the higher of 50,000 and  10% of consideration. Therefore, ` 60 lakh, being the difference between the stamp duty value of the property on the date of registration (i.e., 150 lakh) and the actual consideration (i.e., ` 90 lakh) would be taxable under section 56(2)(x) in the hands of Mr. Rajesh, since the payment on the date of agreement is made by crossed cheque and not account payee cheque/draft or ECS or through credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay.

Case 2: Tax implications if Mr. Hari is a share broker-
-In the hands of Mr. Hari,In case Mr. Hari is a share broker and not a property dealer, the building would represent his capital asset and not stock-in-trade. In such a case, the provisions of section 50C would be attracted in the hands of Mr. Hari, since building is transferred for a consideration less than the stamp duty value; and the stamp duty value exceeds 110% of consideration. Thus, ` 75 lakh, being the difference between the stamp duty value on the date of registration (i.e., ` 150 lakh) and the purchase price (i.e., ` 75 lakh) would be chargeable as short-term capital gains. It may be noted that under section 50C, the option to adopt the stamp duty value on the date of agreement can be exercised only if whole or part of the consideration has been received on or before the date of agreement by way of account payee cheque or draft or by use of ECS through a bank account or through credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service),  UPI(Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay on or before the date of agreement. In this case, since the down payment of ` 15 lakhs has been received on the date of agreement by crossed cheque and not account payee cheque, the option cannot be exercised.

-In the hands of Mr. Rajesh,There would be no difference in the taxability in the hands of Mr. Rajesh, whether Mr. Hari is a property dealer or a stock broker, (except where the property transferred in a residential unit fulfilling the stipulated conditions, which is not so in this case). Therefore, the provisions of section 56(2)(x) would be attracted in the hands of Mr. Rajesh who has received immovable property, being a capital asset, for inadequate consideration and the difference between the consideration and stamp duty value exceeds ` 9,00,000, being the higher of ` 50,000 and 10% of consideration. Therefore, ` 60 lakh, being the difference between the stamp duty value of the property on the date of registration (i.e., ` 150 lakh) and the actual consideration (i.e., ` 90 lakh) would be taxable under section 56(2)(x) in the hands of Mr. Rajesh, since the payment on the date of agreement is made by crossed cheque and not account payee cheque/draft or ECS or through credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service),UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay.


(vii)Compensation or any other payment received in connection with termination of his employment [Section 56(2)(xi)]
Any compensation or any other payment, due to or received by any person, by whatever name called, in connection with the termination of his employment or the modification of the terms and conditions relating thereto shall be chargeable to tax under this head. However, if it is received from employer, then it is taxable u/s 17(3)(i) under the head ―Income from Salaries‖.
(viii)Any specified sum received by a unit holder from a business trust during the previous year [Section 56(2)(xii)]
Section 56(2)(xii) provides that any specified sum received by a unit holder from a business trust during the previous year with respect to unit held by him at any time during the previous year would be chargeable to tax in the hands of unit holder under the head “Income from other sources”. Specified sum is to be computed in the following manner:

Specified sum = A (-) B (-) C (which shall be zero if sum of B and C is greater than A)
A=Aggregate of sum distributed by the business trust with respect to such unit, during the previous year or during any earlier previous year or years, to such unit holder, who holds such unit on the date of distribution of sum or to any other unit holder who held such unit at any time prior to the date of such distribution, which is –
(a)not in the nature of interest and dividend referred to in section 10(23FC) or rental income referred to in section 10(23FCA); and
(b)not chargeable to tax in the hands of the business trust under section 115UA(2)
B=Amount at which such unit was issued by the business trust; and:
C=Amount charged to tax under this clause in any earlier previous year;

(ix)Sum received, including the amount allocated by way of bonus, under a LIP other than under a ULIP and keyman insurance policy, which is not exempt u/s 10(10D) [Section 56(2)(xiii)]
Any sum received under a life insurance policy, including the sum allocated by way of bonus on such policy would not be included in the total income of a person [Section 10(10D)].
The following table summarizes the exemption available under section 10(10D) vis-a-vis the date of issue of such policies and the corresponding condition to be satisfied for exemption -
-In respect of policies issued	before 1.4.2003 = Any sum received under a LIP including the sum allocated by way of bonus is exempt.
-In respect of policies issued	between 1.4.2003 and 31.3.2012 = Any sum received under a LIP including the sum allocated by way of bonus is exempt. However, exemption would not be available if the premium payable for any of the years during the term of the policy exceeds 20% of ―actual capital sum assured.
-In respect of policies issued on or after 1.4.2012  but  before 1.4.2013= Any sum received under a LIP including the sum allocated by way of bonus is exempt. However, exemption would not be available if the premium payable for any of the years during the term of the policy exceeds 10% of actual capital sum assured.

-In respect of policies issued on or after 1.4.2013=(a)Where the insurance is on the life of a person with disability or severe disability as referred to in section 80U or a person suffering from disease or ailment as specified under section 80DDB:Any sum received under a LIP including the sum allocated by way of bonus is exempt. However, exemption would not be available if the premium payable for any of the years during the term of the policy exceeds 15% of ―actual capital sum assured.
(b)Where the insurance is on the life of any person, other than mentioned in (a) above:Any sum received under a LIP including the sum allocated by way of bonus is exempt. However, exemption would not be available if the premium payable for any of the years during the term of the policy exceeds 10% of ―actual capital sum assured.

-In respect of ULIP issued on or after 1.2.2021=Any sum received under a ULIP including the sum allocated by way of bonus is exempt. However, exemption would not be available if the premium payable for any of the years during the term of the policy exceeds 10% or 15%, as the case may be, of ―actual capital sum assured.Further, exemption would also not be available with respect to ULIP issued on or after 1.2.2021, if the amount of premium payable exceeds 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during the term of such ULIP. Such ULIP would be specified ULIP, which is a capital asset. In a case where premium is payable by a person for more than one ULIP issued on or after 1.2.2021 and the aggregate of premium payable on such ULIPs exceed 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during the term of any such ULIPs, exemption would be available in respect of any of those ULIPs, at the option of the assessee, whose aggregate premium payable does not exceed 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during their term. All other ULIPs would be specified ULIPs, which are capital assets. Meaning of ULIP - ULIP means a life insurance policy which has components of both investment and insurance and is linked to a unit defined under IRDA (ULIP) Regulations, 2019 issued by IRDA under the Insurance Act, 1938 and the IRDA Act, 1999.

-In respect of life insurance policies issued on or after 1.4.2023:Any sum received under a LIP including the sum allocated by way of bonus is exempt. However, exemption would not be available if the premium payable for any of the years during the term of the policy exceeds 10% or 15%, as the case may be, of “actual capital sum assured. Further, exemption would also not be available if the amount of premium payable exceeds ` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during the term of such policy. In a case where premium is payable by a person for more than one LIP (other than ULIP) issued on or after 1.4.2023 and the aggregate of premium payable on such policies exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during the term of any such policy(ies), exemption would be available in respect of any of those LIPs (other than ULIP), at the option of the assessee, whose aggregate premium payable does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during their term.
Any sum is received on the death of a person is exempt irrespective of the annual premium payable on the ULIP/LIP. The condition of payment of premium of 10% or 15% or 20% or Rs 5,00,000 would not be applicable.

Exemption is not available in respect of amount received from an insurance policy taken for disabled person under section 80DD: Any sum received under section 80DD(3) shall not be exempt under section 10(10D). Accordingly, if the dependent disabled, in respect of whom an individual or the member of the HUF has paid or deposited any amount in any scheme of LIC or any other insurer, predeceases the individual or the member of the HUF, the amount so paid or deposited shall be deemed to be the income of the assessee of the previous year in which such amount is received. Such amount would not be exempt u/s 10(10D).

Exemption is not available in respect of the sum received under a Keyman insurance policy:Any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy shall also not be exempt.Explanation 1 to section 10(10D) defines ―Keyman insurance policy‖ as a life insurance policy taken by one person on the life of another person who is or was the employee of the first - mentioned person or is or was connected in any manner whatsoever with the business of the first - mentioned person. The term includes within its scope a keyman insurance policy which has been assigned to any person during its term, with or without consideration. Therefore, such policies shall continue to be treated as a keyman insurance policy even after the same is assigned to the keyman. Consequently, the sum received by the keyman on such policies, being ―keyman insurance policies‖, would not be exempt u/s 10(10D).

Unit Linked Insurance Policies:In order to deter the practice of high net worth individuals from claiming exemption u/s 10(10D) by investing in ULIPs with huge premium, additional condition has been stipulated u/s 10(10D) in respect of ULIPs issued on or after 1.2.2021.
In case where an assessee has a Single ULIP issued on or after 1.2.2021 - Exemption u/s 10(10D) would not be available with respect to any ULIP issued on or after 1.2.2021, if the amount of premium payable exceeds ` 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during the term of such ULIP. Such ULIP would be a specified ULIP, which is a capital asset.
In case where an assessee has multiple ULIPs issued on or after 1.2.2021 - In a case where premium is payable by a person for more than one ULIP issued on or after 1.2.2021 and the aggregate of premium payable on such ULIPs exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during the term of any such ULIP(s), exemption u/s 10(10D) would be available in respect of any of those ULIPs, at the option of the assessee, whose aggregate premium payable does not exceed rs 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during their term. All other ULIPs would be specified ULIPs, which are capital assets under section 2(14)(c). However, to get exemption u/s 10(10D), the condition of annual premium not exceeding 10% of the actual capital sum assured also needs to be satisfied.
Exemption in case of death of a person - In case any sum is received on the death of a person, exemption u/s 10(10D) would be available irrespective of the annual premium payable of the ULIP.

Guidelines by CBDT: In case any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this clause, the CBDT may issue guidelines for the purpose of removing the difficulty with the previous approval of the Central Government. Accordingly, the CBDT has, with the approval of the Central Government, vide Circular No. 2/2022, dated 19.01.2022, issued the following guidelines in respect of ULIPs –

Situation 1: No sum including any sum allocated by way of bonus (such sum hereinafter referred as ―consideration‖) is received by the assessee on any ULIPs which are issued on or after 1.2.2021 (such ULIPs hereinafter referred as ―eligible ULIPs‖) during any previous year preceding the current previous year or consideration has been received on such eligible ULIPs in an earlier previous year but has not been claimed exempt. In such a situation, the exemption u/s 10(10D) would be determined as under:
Where the assessee has received consideration, during the current P.Y., under one eligible ULIP only:
1)If the amount of premium payable on such eligible ULIP does not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible ULIP and annual premium does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured is Such consideration would be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D).
Example:Where Date of issue is 1.4.2021, Annual premium is 2,50,000, Sum assured is 25,00,000 and Consideration received as on 01.11.2031 on maturity is 32,00,000 and Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible ULIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2031-32.Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration received would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2032-33, since the annual premium payable on the policy does not exceed Rs 2,50,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.

2)If the amount of premium payable on such eligible ULIP > ` 2,50,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible ULIP and Such consideration would not be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D). For example:Date of issue is 1.4.2021, Annual premium is 5,00,000 and Sum assured is 50,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2031 on maturity is 60,00,000.Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible ULIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2031-32.
Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration received would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2032-33 since the annual premium payable on the eligible ULIP exceeds Rs 2,50,000.

II.Where the assessee has received consideration, during the current P.Y., under more than one eligible ULIP:
-If the aggregate of the amount of premium payable on such eligible ULIPs does not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible ULIPs and the annual premium ≤ 10% of actual capital sum assured=Such consideration would be eligible for exemption under u/s 10(10D). For Example: there are two policy, policy A and policy B. Date of issue of policy A is 1.4.2021 and poilcy B is 1.4.2021. The annual premium of policy A is 1,00,000 and policy B is 1,50,000. The sum assured in policy A is 10,00,000 and policy B is 15,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2031 on maturity on policy A is 12,00,000 and policy B is 18,00,000. Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible ULIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2031-32.
Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) – In this case, the aggregate of the annual premium payable for ULIP ―A‖ and ULIP ―B‖ does not exceed ` 2,50,000 during the term of these policies. Further, annual premium payable in respect of ULIP ―A‖ and ULIP ―B‖ does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. Therefore, the consideration received under ULIP ―A‖ and ―B‖ would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2032-33

-If the aggregate of the amount of premium payable on such eligible ULIPs > Rs 2,50,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible ULIP:Consideration in respect of any of those eligible ULIPs whose aggregate amount of premium  payable  does  not  exceed Rs 2,50,000 for any of the PYs during their term would be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D), provided their annual premium ≤ 10% of actual capital sum assured. For Example: there are three policy, policy A,policy B and policy C. Date of issue of policy A is 1.4.2021 and poilcy B is 1.4.2021 and policy C is 1.4.2021. The annual premium of policy A is 1,00,000 and policy B is 1,50,000 and policy C is 3,00,000. The sum assured in policy A is 10,00,000 and policy B is 15,00,000 and policy C is 30,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2031 on maturity on policy A is 12,00,000 and policy B is 18,00,000 and policy C is 34,00,000.Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible ULIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2031-32. Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) – In this case, the aggregate of the annual premium payable for ULIP ―A‖, ULIP ―B‖ and ULIP ―C‖ exceeds ` 2,50,000 during the term of these policies. However, the consideration received under ULIPs ―A‖ and ―B‖ would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2032-33, since aggregate of annual premium payable for these two policies does not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any previous year during the term of these two policies and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. Consequently, the consideration received under ULIP ―C‖ alone would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2032-33. 
For Example:there are Four policy, policy A,policy B and policy C and policy X. Date of issue of policy A is 1.4.2021 and poilcy B is 1.4.2021 and policy C is 1.4.2021 and policy X is 1.4.2020. The annual premium of policy A is 1,00,000 and policy B is 1,50,000 and policy C is 3,00,000 and policy X is 2,50,000. The sum assured in policy A is 10,00,000 and policy B is 15,00,000 and policy C is 30,00,000 and policy X is 25,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2032 on maturity on policy A is 12,00,000 and policy B is 18,00,000 and policy C is 34,00,000 and policy X will be 30,00,000 on 01.11.2031 .Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible ULIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2031-32. Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration received under ULIP ―X‖ would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2031-32 since annual premium does not exceed 10% of the actual capital sum assured. Moreover, as the policy has been issued before 1.2.2021, limit of ` 2,50,000 of amount of premium payable is not applicable. The aggregate of annual premium payable for ULIP ―A‖, ULIP ―B‖ and ULIP ―C‖ (being ULIPs issued on or after 1.2.2021) exceeds ` 2,50,000 during the term of these policies. However, the consideration received under ULIPs ―A‖ and ―B‖ would be exempt u/s 10( 10D) in A.Y. 2032-33, since aggregate of annual premium payable for these two policies does not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any previous year during the term of these two policies and annual premium payable in respect of these policies does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. Consequently, the consideration received under ULIP ―C‖ alone would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2032-33.


Situation 2: Consideration has been received by the assessee under any one or more eligible ULIPs during any P.Y. preceding the current P.Y. and it has been claimed to be exempt u/s 10(10D). Such eligible ULIPs are referred as ―Earlier Exempt Eligible ULIPs (EEE ULIPs)‖ in this paragraph and corresponding examples and reference to eligible ULIPs shall not include EEE ULIPs. The exemption u/s 10(10D) would be determined as under:
I.Where the assessee has received consideration, during the current P.Y., under one eligible ULIP only:
-If aggregate amount of premium payable on such eligible ULIP and EEE ULIPs does not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible ULIP and annual premium in respect of eligible ULIP does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured=Consideration under such eligible ULIP would be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D). For Example: there are two policy, policy X and policy A. Date of issue of policy X is 1.4.2021 and poilcy A is 1.4.2022. The annual premium of policy X is 2,00,000 and policy A is 50,000. The sum assured in policy X is 20,00,000 and policy A is 15,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2031 on maturity on policy X is 25,00,000 and policy A on 01.11.2032  is 6,00,000.Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible ULIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2032-33, except ULIP X in P.Y. 2031-32. Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) – The consideration under ULIP ―X‖ would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2032-33, since the annual premium does not exceed ` 2,50,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. The consideration received under ULIP ―A‖ will also be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2033-34 since aggregate of the annual premium payable for ULIP ―A‖ and ULIP ―X‖ does not exceed  2,50,000 for the P.Ys. 2022-23 to 2031-32 and the annual premium of ULIP ―A‖ does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.

-If aggregate amount of premium payable on such eligible ULIP and EEE ULIPs >  2,50,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible ULIP=Consideration under such eligible ULIP would not be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D).For Example: there are two policy, policy X and policy A. Date of issue of policy X is 1.4.2021 and poilcy A is 1.4.2022. The annual premium of policy X is 2,00,000 and policy A is 1,00,000. The sum assured in policy X is 20,00,000 and policy A is 10,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2031 on maturity on policy X is 25,00,000 and policy A on 01.11.2032  is 12,00,000.Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible ULIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2032-33, except ULIP X in P.Y. 2031-32.Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) – The consideration under ULIP ―X‖ would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2032-33, since the annual premium does not exceed ` 2,50,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. The consideration received under ULIP ―A‖ will not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2033-34 since aggregate of the annual premium payable for ULIP ―A‖ and ULIP ―X‖ (both ULIPs issued on or after 1.2.2021) exceeds ` 2,50,000.


II.Where the assessee has received consideration, during the current P.Y., under more than one eligible ULIP:
-If aggregate of the amount of premium payable on such eligible ULIPs and EEE ULIPs does not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible ULIPs and annual premium in respect of eligible ULIPs also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.=Consideration received would be eligible for exemption under u/s 10(10D).

-If aggregate of the amount of premium payable on such eligible ULIPs and EEE ULIPs > ` 2,50,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible ULIPs=Consideration in respect of any of those eligible ULIPs (whose aggregate amount of premium along with the aggregate amount of premium of EEE ULIPs does not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the PYs during their term) would be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D).
For example,here are Four policy, policy A,policy B and policy C and policy X. Date of issue of policy A is 1.4.2022 and poilcy B is 1.4.2022 and policy C is 1.4.2022 and policy X is 1.4.2021. The annual premium of policy A is 1,00,000 and policy B is 1,50,000 and policy C is 3,00,000 and policy X is 2,00,000. The sum assured in policy A is 10,00,000 and policy B is 15,00,000 and policy C is 30,00,000 and policy X is 25,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2032 on maturity on policy A is 12,00,000 and policy B is 18,00,000 and policy C is 34,00,000 and policy X will be 25,00,000 on 01.11.2031 .Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration under ULIP ―X‖ would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2032-33, since the annual premium does not exceed ` 2,50,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. In this case, the aggregate of the annual premium payable for ULIP ―A‖, ULIP ―B‖ and ULIP―C‖ along with the premium for ULIP ―X‖ exceeds ` 2,50,000 during the term of these policies. Hence, the consideration received under ULIPs ―A‖, ―B‖ and ―C‖ will not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2033-34.
Alternative treatment: If the consideration under ULIP ―X‖ was not claimed to be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2032-33 by the assessee, then, the consideration received under ULIP―A‖ and ULIP ―B‖ would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y.2033 -34 since the aggregate of the annual premium payable for the ULIPs ―A‖ and ―B‖ together did not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during the term of these two policies.

For exmaple:here are Four policy, policy A,policy B and policy C and policy X. Date of issue of policy A is 1.4.2022 and poilcy B is 1.4.2022 and policy C is 1.4.2022 and policy X is 1.4.2021. The annual premium of policy A is 1,00,000 and policy B is 1,50,000 and policy C is 3,00,000 and policy X is 1,00,000. The sum assured in policy A is 10,00,000 and policy B is 15,00,000 and policy C is 30,00,000 and policy X is 10,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2032 on maturity on policy A is 12,00,000 and policy B is 18,00,000 and policy C is 34,00,000 and policy X will be 12,00,000 on 01.11.2031 .Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration under ULIP ―X‖ would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2032-33, since the annual premium does not exceed ` 2,50,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. In this case, the aggregate of the annual premium payable for ULIP ―A‖, ULIP ―B‖ and ULIP―C‖ along with the premium for ULIP ―X‖ exceeds ` 2,50,000 during the term of these policies. However, the consideration received under ULIPs ―A‖ or ―B‖ (any one) can be claimed as exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2033-34. If the consideration received under ULIP ―A‖ claimed to be exempt as aggregate of the annual premium payable for ULIP ―X‖ and ―A‖ did not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under ULIP ―B‖ would not be exempt. If the consideration received under ULIP ―B‖ claimed to be exempt as aggregate of the annual premium payable for ULIP ―X‖ and ―B‖ did not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under ULIP ―A‖ would not be exempt. Exemption for consideration received under ULIP ―B‖ is preferred as it is more beneficial to the assessee.Alternative treatment: If the consideration under ULIP ―X‖ was not claimed to be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2032-33 by the assessee, then the consideration received under ULIP ―A‖ and ULIP ―B‖ would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2033-34 since the aggregate of the annual premium payable for the ULIPs ―A‖ and ―B‖ together did not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during the term of these two policies. It may be noted that in every case, the consideration received for ULIP ―C‖ would not be exempt u/s 10(10D).

For example:here are Five policy, policy A,policy B and policy C and policy X and policy Y. Date of issue of policy A is 1.4.2022 and poilcy B is 1.4.2022 and policy C is 1.4.2022 and policy X is 1.4.2021 and policy Y is 1.4.2021. The annual premium of policy A is 1,00,000 and policy B is 1,50,000 and policy C is 3,00,000 and policy X is 1,00,000 and policy Y is 1,00,000. The sum assured in policy A is 10,00,000 and policy B is 15,00,000 and policy C is 30,00,000 and policy X is 10,00,000 and policy Y is 10,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2032 on maturity on policy A is 12,00,000 and policy B is 18,00,000 and policy C is 34,00,000 and policy Y will be 12,00,000 on 01.11.2031 and policy X will be 6,00,000 on 1.7.2025.Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration under ULIP ―X‖ would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y.2026-27, since the annual premium does not exceed ` 2,50,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.
The consideration received under ULIP ―Y‖ would be exempt u/s 10( 10D) in A.Y. 2032-33, since the aggregate of annual premium payable for ULIP ―X‖ and ―Y‖ does not exceed ` 2,50,000 and annual premium payable for ULIP ―Y‖ does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. The consideration received under ULIPs ―A‖, ULIP ―B‖ and ULIP ―C‖ would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2033-34, since aggregate of annual premium payable for these three policies and ULIP ―X‖ and ―Y‖ exceeds ` 2,50,000. Alternative treatment: If the consideration on surrender under ULIP ―X‖ was not claimed to be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2026-27 by the assessee, then the consideration received under ULIP ―Y‖ would be exempt and the consideration received under ULIP ―A‖ or ULIP ―B‖ (any one) can be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2033-34. If the consideration received under ULIP ―A‖ claimed to be exempt, as aggregate of the annual premium payable for ULIP ―Y‖ and ―A‖ did not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under ULIP ―B‖ would not be exempt.If the consideration received under ULIP ―B‖ is claimed to be exempt as aggregate of the annual premium payable for ULIP ―Y‖ and ―B‖ did not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under ULIP ―A‖ would not be exempt. Exemption for consideration received under ULIP ―B‖ is preferred as it is more beneficial to the assessee. If the consideration on surrender of ULIP ―X‖ and on maturity of ULIP ―Y‖ were not claimed to be exempt under section 10(10D) in A.Y.2026-27 and A.Y.2032-33, respectively, then consideration received under both ULIP ―A‖ and ULIP ―B‖ would be exempt in A.Y.2033 -34 (being ULIPs issued on or after 1.2.2021, whose aggregate consideration does not exceed ` 2,50,000). It may be noted that, in every case, consideration received under ULIP ―C‖ would not be exempt under section 10(10D).

Life Insurance Policies (Other than Unit Linked Insurance Policies):In case where an assessee has a single life insurance policy (other than ULIP) issued on or after 1.4.2023 - Exemption u/s 10(10D) would not be available with respect to any life insurance policy (other than ULIP) issued on or after 1.4.2023, if the amount of premium payable exceeds ` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during the term of such life insurance policy. In case where an assessee has multiple life insurance policies (other than ULIPs) issued on or after 1.4.2023 - In a case where premium is payable by a person for more than one life insurance policies (other than ULIPs) issued on or after 1.4.2023 and the aggregate of premium payable on such life insurance policies exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during the term of any such LIP(s), exemption u/s 10(10D) would be available in respect of any of those LIPs, at the option of the assessee, whose aggregate premium payable does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during their term. However, to get exemption u/s 10(10D), the condition of annual premium not exceeding 10% of the actual capital sum assured also needs to be satisfied.
Exemption in case of death of a person - In case any sum is received on the death of a person, exemption u/s 10(10D) would be available irrespective of the annual premium payable of the LIP.
Guidelines by CBDT: In case any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this clause, the CBDT may issue guidelines for the purpose of removing the difficulty with the previous approval of the Central Government.
 Accordingly, the CBDT has, with the approval of the Central Government, vide Circular No. 15/2023, dated 16.08.2023, issued the following guidelines in respect of LIPs (other than ULIPs)–
Situation 1: No sum of any nature including bonus (such sum hereinafter referred as “consideration”) is received by the assessee on any LIPs which are issued on or after 1.4.2023 (such LIPs hereinafter referred as “eligible LIPs”) during any previous year preceding the current previous year or consideration has been received on such eligible LIPs in an earlier previous year but has not been claimed exempt. In such a situation, the exemption u/s 10(10D) would be determined as under:
I.Where the assessee has received consideration, during the current P.Y., under one eligible LIP only:
-If the amount of premium payable on such eligible LIP does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIP and annual premium does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured=Such consideration would be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D). For Example:if there is Date of issue on 1.4.2013, Annual premium is 6,00,000, Sum assured is 60,00,000 and Consideration received as on 01.11.2023 on maturity is 70,00,000.Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2023-24.Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration received under LIP “A” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2024-25 since annual premium does not exceed 10% of the actual capital sum assured. Moreover, as the policy has been issued before 1.4.2023, limit of ` 5,00,000 of amount of premium payable is not applicable, since it is not an eligible ULIP.
For Example:if there is Date of issue on 1.4.2023, Annual premium is 5,00,000, Sum assured is 50,00,000 and Consideration received as on 01.11.2023 on maturity is 52,00,000.Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34.Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration received would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35, since the annual premium payable on the policy does not exceed  5,00,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.

-If the amount of premium payable on such eligible LIP > ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIP:Such consideration	would not be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D). For example:if there is Date of issue on 1.4.2023, Annual premium is 6,00,000, Sum assured is 60,00,000 and Consideration received as on 01.11.2023 on maturity is 70,00,000.Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34. Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration received would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35 since the annual premium payable on the eligible LIP exceeds Rs 5,00,000.

II.Where the assessee has received consideration, during the current P.Y., under more than one eligible LIP:
-If the aggregate of the amount of premium payable on such eligible LIPs does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIPs and the annual premium ≤ 10% of actual capital sum assured:Such consideration would be eligible for exemption under u/s 10(10D). For example:there are two policy, policy A and policy B. Date of issue of policy A is 1.4.2023 and poilcy B is 1.4.2023. The annual premium of policy A is 3,00,000 and policy B is 2,00,000. The sum assured in policy A is 30,00,000 and policy B is 20,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2033 on maturity on policy A is 32,00,000 and policy B is 21,00,000.Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34. Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) – In this case, the aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “A” and LIP “B” does not exceed ` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies. Further, annual premium payable in respect of LIP “A” and LIP “B” does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. Therefore, the consideration received under LIP “A” and “B” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35.

-If the aggregate of the amount of premium payable on such eligible LIPs > ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIP =Consideration in respect of any of those eligible LIPs whose aggregate amount of premium payable does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during their term would be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D), provided their annual premium ≤ 10% of actual capital sum assured. For Example:there are two policy, policy A and policy B. Date of issue of policy A is 1.4.2023 and poilcy B is 1.4.2023. The annual premium of policy A is 4,50,000 and policy B is 5,50,000. The sum assured in policy A is 45,00,000 and policy B is 55,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2033 on maturity on policy A is 52,00,000 and policy B is 60,00,000. Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34. Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) – In this case, the aggregate of the annual premium
payable for LIP “A” and LIP “B” exceeds ` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies. However, the consideration received under LIP “A” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35, since its annual premium payable does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any previous year during the term of the policy and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. Consequently, the consideration received under LIP “B” alone would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35.
For Example:there are three policy, policy A and policy B and policy C. Date of issue of policy A is 1.4.2023 and poilcy B is 1.4.2023 and policy C is 1.4.2023. The annual premium of policy A is 1,00,000 and policy B is 3,50,000 and policy C is 6,00,000. The sum assured in policy A is 10,00,000 and policy B is 35,00,000 and policy C is 60,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2033 on maturity on policy A is 12,00,000 and policy B is 40,00,000 and policy C is 70,00,000.Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34.Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The aggregate of annual premium payable for LIP “A”, LIP “B” and LIP “C” exceeds ` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies. However, the consideration received under LIPs “A” and “B” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35, since aggregate of annual premium payable for these two policies does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any previous year during the term of these two policies and annual premium payable in respect of these policies does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. Consequently, the consideration received under LIP “C” alone would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35.
For example,there are four policy, policy A and policy B and policy C and policy X. Date of issue of policy A is 1.4.2023 and poilcy B is 1.4.2023 and policy C is 1.4.2023 and policy X is 1.4.2022. The annual premium of policy A is 1,00,000 and policy B is 3,50,000 and policy C is 6,00,000 and policy X is 5,50,000. The sum assured in policy A is 10,00,000 and policy B is 35,00,000 and policy C is 60,00,000 and policy X is 55,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2033 on maturity on policy A is 12,00,000 and policy B is 40,00,000 and policy C is 70,00,000 and policy X is 62,00,000 on 01.11.2032 .Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34, except LIP X in P.Y. 2032-33.Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration received under LIP “X” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2032-33, since annual premium does not exceed 10% of the actual capital sum assured. Moreover, as the policy has been issued before 1.4.2023, limit of ` 5,00,000 on amount of premium payable is not applicable, since LIP “X” is not an eligible LIP. The aggregate of annual premium payable for LIP “A”, LIP “B” and LIP “C” (being LIPs issued on or after 1.4.2023) exceeds ` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies. However, the consideration received under LIPs “A” and “B” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35, since aggregate of annual premium payable for these two policies does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any previous year during the term of these two policies and annual premium payable in respect of these policies does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. Consequently, the consideration received under LIP “C” alone would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35.

Situation 2: Consideration has been received by the assessee under any one or more eligible LIPs during any P.Y. preceding the current P.Y. and it has been claimed to be exempt u/s 10(10D). Such eligible LIPs are referred as “Earlier Exempt Eligible LIPs (EEE LIPs)” in this paragraph and corresponding examples and reference to eligible LIPs shall not include EEE LIPs. The exemption u/s 10(10D) would be determined as under:
I.Where the assessee has received consideration, during the current P.Y., under one eligible LIP only:
-If aggregate amount of premium payable on such eligible LIP and EEE LIPs does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIP and annual premium in respect of eligible LIP does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.=Consideration under such eligible LIP would be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D).
-If aggregate amount of premium payable on such eligible LIP and EEE LIPs > ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIP=Consideration under such eligible LIP would not be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D).


II.Where the assessee has received consideration, during the current P.Y., under more than one eligible LIP:
-If  aggregate  of  the  amount  of premium payable on such eligible LIPs and EEE LIPs does not exceed 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIPs and annual premium in respect of eligible
LIPs also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. = Consideration received would be eligible for exemption under u/s 10(10D).

-If aggregate of the amount of premium payable on such eligible LIPs and EEE LIPs > ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIPs = Consideration in respect of any of those eligible LIPs (whose aggregate amount of premium along with the aggregate amount of premium of EEE    LIPs    does    not    exceed  5,00,000 for any of the PYs during their term) would be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D).
For example,there are four policy, policy A and policy B and policy C and policy X. Date of issue of policy A is 1.4.2024 and poilcy B is 1.4.2024 and policy C is 1.4.2024 and policy X is 1.4.2023. The annual premium of policy A is 1,00,000 and policy B is 1,50,000 and policy C is 6,00,000 and policy X is 4,50,000. The sum assured in policy A is 10,00,000 and policy B is 15,00,000 and policy C is 60,00,000 and policy X is 45,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2034 on maturity on policy A is 12,00,000 and policy B is 18,00,000 and policy C is 70,00,000 and policy X is 50,00,000 on 01.11.2033.Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2034-35, except LIP X in P.Y. 2033-34. Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration under LIP “X” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in P.Y. 2033-34, since the annual premium does not exceed ` 5,00,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.
In this case, the aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “A”, LIP “B” and LIP “C” along with the premium for LIP “X” exceeds ` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies. The aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “A” and the premium for LIP “X” also exceeds ` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies. Consequently, the consideration received under LIP “A”, LIP “B” and LIP “C” would not be
exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2035-36.
For example:there are four policy, policy A and policy B and policy C and policy X. Date of issue of policy A is 1.4.2024 and poilcy B is 1.4.2024 and policy C is 1.4.2024 and policy X is 1.4.2023. The annual premium of policy A is 2,00,000 and policy B is 2,50,000 and policy C is 6,00,000 and policy X is 2,50,000. The sum assured in policy A is 20,00,000 and policy B is 25,00,000 and policy C is 60,00,000 and policy X is 25,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2034 on maturity on policy A is 24,00,000 and policy B is 38,00,000 and policy C is 70,00,000 and policy X is 30,00,000 on 01.11.2033.Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2034-35, except LIP X in P.Y. 2033-34. Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration under LIP “X” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in P.Y. 2033-34, since the annual premium does not exceed ` 5,00,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.
In this case, the aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “A”, LIP “B” and LIP “C” along with the premium for LIP “X” exceeds ` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies.
However, the consideration received under LIPs “A” or “B” (any one) can be claimed as exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2035-36. If the consideration received under LIP “A” is claimed to be exempt as aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “X” and “A” did not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under LIP “B” would not be exempt. If the consideration received under LIP “B” is claimed to be exempt as aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “X” and “B” did not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under LIP “A” would not be exempt. Exemption for consideration received under LIP “B” is preferred as it is more beneficial to the assessee. Alternative treatment: If the consideration under LIP “X” was not claimed to be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35 by the assessee, then, the consideration received under LIP “A” and LIP “B” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2035-36 since the aggregate of the annual premium payable for the LIPs “A” and “B” together did not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during the term of these two policies. However, the most beneficial treatment is to claim LIP “X” and “B” as exempt. It may be noted that in every case, the consideration received for LIP “C” would not be exempt u/s 10(10D).

For example:there are five policy, policy A and policy B and policy C and policy X and policy Y. Date of issue of policy A is 1.4.2024 and poilcy B is 1.4.2024 and policy C is 1.4.2024 and policy X is 1.4.2023 and policy Y is 1.4.2023. The annual premium of policy A is 2,00,000 and policy B is 3,00,000 and policy C is 6,00,000 and policy X is 2,00,000 and policy Y is 2,00,000. The sum assured in policy A is 20,00,000 and policy B is 30,00,000 and policy C is 60,00,000 and policy X is 20,00,000 and policy Y is 20,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2035 on maturity on policy A is 24,00,000 and policy B is 36,00,000 and policy C is 70,00,000 and policy X is 12,00,000 on 01.07.2033 and policy Y on 1.11.2034.Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2035-36, except LIP “X” and “Y”. Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration under LIP “X” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y.2034-35, since the annual premium does not exceed ` 5,00,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. The consideration received under LIP “Y” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2035-36, since the aggregate of annual premium payable for LIP “X” and “Y” does not exceed 5,00,000 and annual premium payable for LIP “Y” does not exceed 10% of actual capital
sum assured. The consideration received under LIPs “A”, ULIP “B” and ULIP “C” would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2036-37, since aggregate of annual premium payable for these three policies and LIP “X” and “Y” exceeds ` 5,00,000. Alternative treatment: If the consideration on surrender under LIP “X” was not claimed to be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35 by the assessee, then the consideration received under LIP “Y” would be exempt and the consideration received under LIP “A” or LIP “B” (any one) can be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2036-37. If the consideration received under LIP “A” is claimed to be exempt, as aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “Y” and “A” did not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under LIP “B” would not be exempt. If the consideration received under LIP “B” is claimed to be exempt as aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “Y” and “B” did not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under LIP “A” would not be exempt. Exemption for consideration received under LIP “B” is preferred as it is more beneficial to the assessee. If the consideration on surrender of LIP “X” and on maturity of LIP “Y” were not claimed to be exempt under section 10(10D) in A.Y.2034-35 and A.Y.2035-36, respectively, then consideration received under both LIP “A” and LIP “B” would be exempt in A.Y.2036-37 (being LIPs issued on or after 1.4.2023, whose aggregate consideration does not exceed 5,00,000). It may be noted that, in every case, consideration received under LIP “C” would not be exempt under section 10(10D).

For Example: Suppose we have two ULIP policy that is X and Y. We have three policy A,B and C.Date of issue of policy A is 1.4.2023 and poilcy B is 1.4.2023 and policy C is 1.4.2023 and policy X is 1.4.2021 and policy Y is 1.4.2023. The annual premium of policy A is 1,00,000 and policy B is 1,50,000 and policy C is 3,00,000 and policy X is 1,00,000 and policy Y is 1,00,000. The sum assured in policy A is 10,00,000 and policy B is 15,00,000 and policy C is 30,00,000 and policy X is 10,00,000 and policy Y is 10,00,000. Consideration received as on 01.11.2033  on maturity on policy A is 6,00,000 and policy x is 6,00,000 .Consideration received as on 01.11.2034 on maturity is policy Y is 12,00,000 and policy B is 18,00,000 and  policy C is 34,00,000.Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs or ULIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2034-35, except ULIP “X” and LIP “A”. 
Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration under ULIP “X” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35, since the annual premium does not exceed ` 2,50,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.
The consideration under ULIP “Y” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y.2035-36, since the aggregate of annual premium for UIP “X” and ULIP “Y” does not exceed ` 2,50,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.nThe consideration under LIP “A” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y.2034-35, since the annual premium does not exceed ` 5,00,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.
In this case, the aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “B” and LIP “C” along with the premium for LIP “A” exceeds ` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies.
However, the consideration received under LIPs “B” or “C” (any one) can be claimed as
exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2035-36. If the consideration received under LIP “B” is claimed to be exempt as aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “A” and “B” did not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under LIP “C” would not be exempt. If the consideration received under LIP “C” is claimed to be exempt as aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “A” and “C” did not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under LIP “B” would not be exempt. Exemption for consideration received under LIP “C” should be preferred as it is more beneficial to the assessee.
Alternative treatment: If the consideration under LIP “A” was not claimed to be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35 by the assessee, then the consideration received under LIP “B” and LIP “C” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2035-36 since the aggregate of the annual premium payable for the LIPs “B” and “C” together did not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during the term of these two policies. This would be most beneficial to the assessee. Clarification on GST Component: It is also clarified by the CBDT that the premium payable/ aggregate premium payable for a life insurance policy/policies, other than a ULIP, issued on or after 1.4.2023, for any previous year, would be exclusive of the amount of GST payable on such premium.
Clarification on premium of Term life insurance policy: It is further clarified by the CBDT that the limit of ` 5,00,000 of amount of premium payable would not be applicable in case of a term life insurance policy i.e. where sum under a life insurance policy is only paid to the nominee in case of the death of the person insured during the term of the policy and no amount is paid to anyone if the insured person survives the policy tenure. Hence, any sum received under a term insurance policy shall continue to be exempt under section 10(10D), irrespective of the amount of the premium payable in respect of such policy. Further the premium paid for such policies would not be counted for checking the limit of ` 5,00,000 of amount of premium payable.

Taxability of sum received under a LIP which is not exempt u/s 10(10D) [Section 56(2)(xiii)]: Where any sum is received (including the amount allocated by way of bonus) at any time during a previous year, under a life insurance policy, other than the sum
(i)received under a ULIP
(ii)received under a Keyman insurance policy
which is not exempt under section 10(10D), the sum so received as exceeds the aggregate of the premium paid during the term of such life insurance policy, and not claimed as deduction under any other provision of the Act, computed in the prescribed manner, would be chargeable to tax under the head “Income from other sources”. Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide this notification, notified Rule 11UACA to compute the income chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(xiii). Where any person receives at any time during any previous year any sum under such LIP, then, the income chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(xiii) during the previous year in which such sum is received has to be computed in the following manner -
-Where the sum is received for the first time under the LIP during the previous year (first previous year)=Income chargeable to tax during the previous year in which such sum is received A-B, where A = the sum or aggregate of sum received under the LIP during the first previous year; and B = the aggregate of the premium paid during the term of the LIP till the date of receipt of the sum in the first previous year that has not been claimed as deduction under any other provision of the Act.
-where the sum is received under the LIP during the previous year subsequent to the first previous year (subsequent previous year)=Income chargeable to tax during the previous year in which such sum is received is C-D, where C = the sum or aggregate of sum received under the LIP during the subsequent previous year; and D = the aggregate of the premium paid during the term of the LIP till the date of receipt of the sum in the subsequent previous year not being premium which –
(a)has been claimed as deduction under any other provision of the Act; or
(b)is included in “B” or “D” in any of the previous year(s).

“Sum received under a LIP” means any amount, by whatever name called, received under such policy which is not exempt under section 10(10D), other than the sum–
(a)received under a ULIP; or
(b)received under a Keyman insurance policy
(i)Any sum received by an employer-assessee from his employees as contributions to any provident fund, superannuation fund or any other fund for the welfare of the employees.
(ii)Income from letting out on hire, machinery, plant or furniture.
(iii)Where letting out of buildings is inseparable from the letting out of machinery, plant or furniture, the income from such letting.
(iv)Interest on securities: However, the following Interest income arising to certain persons would be exempt under section 10(15):
(a)Income by way of interest, premium on redemption or other payment on notified securities, bonds, annuity certificates or other savings certificates is exempt subject to such conditions and limits as may be specified in the notification.
Interest on Post Office Savings Bank Account would be exempt from tax to the extent of:
(1)` 3,500 in case of an individual account.
(2)` 7,000 in case of a joint account.
(b)Interest payable —
(1)by public sector companies on certain specified bonds and debentures subject to the conditions which the Central Government may specify by notification, including the condition that the holder of such bonds or debentures registers his name and holding with that company;
Accordingly, the Central Government has specified tax free bonds issued by India Infrastructure Company Ltd. and tax free, secured, redeemable, non- convertible Bonds of the Indian Railway Finance Corporation Ltd. (IRFCL), National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd. (RECL), Housing and Urban Development Corporation Ltd. (HUDCL), Power Finance Corporation (PFC),Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust, Dredging Corporation of India Limited, Ennore Port Limited and The Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited, the interest from which would be exempt under this section.
(2)by Government of India on deposit made by an employee of the Central or State Government or a public sector company in accordance with the scheme as may be notified of the moneys due to him on account of his retirement while on superannuation or otherwise. It is significant that this scheme is not applicable to non-Government employees.
The term ‗industrial undertaking‘ means any undertaking which is engaged in:
(i)the manufacture or processing of goods; or
(ii)the manufacture of computer software or recording of programmes on any disc, tape, perforated media or other information device; or
(iii)the business of generation or generation and distribution of electricity or any other form of power; or
(iv)the business of providing telecommunication services; or
(v)mining; or
(vi)construction of ships, or
(vii)the business of ship-breaking; or
(viii)the operation of ships or aircrafts or construction or operation of rail systems.
For the purposes of the clause, ―interest‖ shall not include interest paid on delayed payment of loan or default if which is more than 2% p.a. over the rate of interest payable in terms of such loan. Interest would include hedging transaction charges on account of currency fluctuation.
(c)Bhopal Gas Victims - Section 10(15)(v) provides exemption in respect of interest on securities held by the Welfare Commissioner, Bhopal Gas Victims, Bhopal, in the Reserve Bank‘s Account No. SL/DH 048. Recently, in terms of an order of the Supreme Court to finance the construction of a hospital at Bhopal to serve the victims of the gas leak, the shares of the Union Carbide Indian Ltd., have been sold. The scope of the above exemption has been extended to interest on deposits for the benefit of the victims of the Bhopal Gas Leak disaster. Such deposits can be held in such account with the RBI or with a public sector bank as the Central Government may notify in the Official Gazette.
(d)Interest on Gold Deposit Bond issued under the Gold Deposit Scheme, 1999 or deposit certificates issued under the Gold Monetization Scheme, 2015 notified by the Central Government.
(e)Interest on bonds, issued by –
(1)a local authority; or
(2)a State Pooled Finance Entity
and specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.
-“State Pooled Finance Entity” means such entity which is set up in accordance with the guidelines for the Pooled Finance Development Scheme notified by the Central Government in the Ministry of Urban Development.
-Accordingly, the Central Government has specified the ―Tax-free Pooled Finance Development Bonds‖ under Pooled Finance Development Fund Scheme of Government of India, interest from which would be exempt under section 10(15).
(3)Keyman Insurance Policy:Any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy including the sum allocated by way of bonus on such policy is chargeable under the head ―Income from other sources‖ if such income is not chargeable under the head ―Profits and gains if business or profession‖ or under the head ―Salaries‖ i.e. if such sum is received by any person other than the employer who took the policy and the employee in whose name the policy was taken.
(4)Residual Income:Any income chargeable to tax under the Act, but not falling under any other head of income shall be chargeable to tax under the head ―Income from other sources‖ e.g. Salary received by an MPs/MLAs will not be chargeable to income-tax under the head ‗Salary‘ but will be chargeable as ―Income from other sources‖ under section 56.



Interest from non-SLR Securities of Banks: Whether chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” or “Income from other sources”? [Circular No. 18, dated 2.11.2015]
The issue addressed by this circular is whether in the case of banks, expenses relatable to investment in non-SLR securities need to be disallowed under section 57(i), by considering interest on non-SLR securities as ―Income from other sources."
Section 56(1)(id) provides that income by way of interest on securities shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head "Income from Other Sources", if the income is not chargeable to income-tax under the head "Profits and Gains of Business and Profession". The CBDT clarified that the investments made by a banking concern are part of the business of banking. Therefore, the income arising from such investments is attributable to the business of banking falling under the head "Profits and Gains of Business and Profession".


APPLICABLE RATE OF TAX IN RESPECT OF CASUAL INCOME [SECTION 115BB]:
(1)This section provides that income by way of winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles, races including horse races or card games and other games of any sort or from gambling or betting of any form would be taxed at a flat rate of 30% plus surcharge, if applicable, plus health and education cess @4%.
However, income by way of winnings from any online game would not be taxed under this section.
(2)No expenditure or allowance can be allowed from such income.
(3)Deduction under Chapter VI-A is not allowable from such income.
(4)Adjustment of unexhausted basic exemption limit is also not permitted against such income.

APPLICABLE RATE OF TAX IN RESPECT OF WINNINGS FROM ONLINE GAMES [SECTION 115BBJ]
(1)This section provides that net winnings from any online game would be taxed at a flat rate of 30% plus surcharge, if applicable, plus health and education cess@4%.
(2)No expenditure or allowance can be allowed from such income.
(3)Deduction under Chapter VI-A is not allowable from such income.
(4)Adjustment of unexhausted basic exemption limit is also not permitted against such income.
Meaning of certain terms-
(i)Internet=The combination of computer facilities and electromagnetic transmission media, and related equipment and software, comprising the interconnected worldwide network of computer networks that transmits information based on a protocol for controlling such transmission
(ii)Online game=A game that is offered on the internet and is accessible by a user through a computer resource including any telecommunication device.


5.6DEDUCTIONS ALLOWABLE [SECTION 57]:
The income chargeable under the head ―Income from other sources‖ shall be computed after
making the following deductions:
(1)In the case of dividend or income in respect of units of a mutual fund specified under section 10(23D) or income in respect of units of a specified company defined in the Explanation to section 10(35): Interest expenditure to earn such income is allowed as deduction subject to a maximum of 20% of such income included in the total income, without deduction under this section.
(2)In the case of interest on securities: Any reasonable sum paid by way of commission or remuneration to a banker or any other person for the purpose of realising such interest on behalf of the assessee.
(3)Income consists of recovery from employees as contribution to any provident fund etc. in terms of section 2(24)(x): A deduction will be allowed in accordance with the provisions of section 36(1)(va) i.e. to the extent the contribution is remitted before the due date under the respective Acts.
(4)Where the income to be charged under this head is from letting on hire of machinery, plant and furniture, with or without building: The following items of deductions are allowable in the computation of such income:
(i)the amount paid on account of any current repairs to the machinery, plant or furniture.
(ii)the amount of any premium paid in respect of insurance against risk of damage or destruction of the machinery or plant or furniture.
(iii)the normal depreciation allowance in respect of the machinery, plant or furniture, due thereon.

(5)In the case of income in the nature of family pension: A deduction of a sum equal to 33- 1/3 percent of such income or ` 15,000, whichever is less, is allowable. From A.Y.2024-25, this deduction is allowable both under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC and under the optional tax regime i.e., normal provisions of the Act.
For the purposes of this deduction ―family pension‖ means a regular monthly amount payable by the employer to a person belonging to the family of an employee in the event of his death:
Exemption in respect of family pension:
a)The family pension received by the widow or children or nominated heirs, of a member of the armed forces (including para-military forces) of the Union, where the death of such member has occurred in the course of operational duties, in specified circumstances would, however, be exempt under section 10(19).
b)The family pension received by any member of the family of an individual who had been in the service of Central or State Government and had been awarded ―Param Vir Chakra‖ or ―Vir Chakra‖ or ―Vir Chakra‖ or other notified gallantry awards would be exempt under section 10(18)(ii).


(6)Any other expenditure not being in the nature of capital expenditure laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of making or earning such income.
(7)In case of income by way of interest on compensation/ enhanced compensation received chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(viii): Deduction of 50% of such income. No deduction would be allowable under any other clause of section 57 in respect of such income.

ILLUSTRATION:Interest on enhanced compensation received by Mr. G during the previous year 2023-24 is 5,00,000. Out of this interest, ` 1,50,000 relates to the previous year 2019-20, ` 1,65,000 relates to previous year 2020-21 and ` 1,85,000 relates to previous year 2021-22. Discuss the tax implication, if any, of such interest income for A.Y.2024-25.-The entire interest of ` 5,00,000 would be taxable in the year of receipt, namely, P.Y.2023-24. Interest on enhanced compensation taxable u/s 56(2)(viii) less : Deduction under section 57(iv) @50%(i.e.2,50,000) and Interest chargeable under the head “Income from other sources” is 2,50,000.


DEDUCTIONS NOT ALLOWABLE [SECTION 58]:
No deduction shall be made in computing the ―Income from other sources‖ of an assessee in
respect of the following items of expenses:
(1)In the case of any assessee:
(i)any personal expense of the assessee;
(ii)any interest chargeable to tax under the Act which is payable outside India on which tax has not been paid or deducted at source.
(iii)any payment taxable in India as salaries, if it is payable outside India unless tax has been paid thereon or deducted at source.
 
(2)Any expenditure in respect of which a payment is made to a related person or made in cash in excess of ` 10,000: In addition to these disallowances, section 58(2) specifically provides that the disallowance of any expenditure in respect of which a payment is made to a related person, to the extent the same is considered excessive or unreasonable by the Assessing Officer, having regard to the FMV. and disallowance of payment or aggregate of payments exceeding ` 10,000 made to a person during a day otherwise than by account payee cheque or draft or ECS through bank account or through such other prescribed electronic mode such as credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT, and BHIM Aadhar Pay covered by section 40A will be applicable to the computation of income under the head ‗Income from other sources‘ as well.

(3)Disallowance of 30% of expenditure: 30% of expenditure shall not be allowed, in respect of a sum which is payable to a resident and on which tax is deductible at source, if
•such tax has not been deducted or;
•such tax after deduction has not been paid on or before the due date of return specified in section 139(1).
In case, assessee fails to deduct the whole or any part of tax on any such sum but is not deemed as assessee in default under the first proviso to section 201(1) by reason that such payee –
(i)has furnished his return of income under section 139;
(ii)has taken into account such sum for computing income in such return of income; and
(iii)has paid the tax due on the income declared by him in such return of income, and the payer furnishes a certificate to this effect from an accountant in such form as may be prescribed,
it would be deemed that the assessee has deducted and paid the tax on such sum.
The date of deduction and payment of taxes by the payer shall be deemed to be the date on which return of income has been furnished by the payee.

(4)No deduction in respect of any expenditure incurred in connection with casual income: No deduction in respect of any expenditure or allowance in connection with income by way of earnings from lotteries, cross word puzzles, races including horse races, card games and other games of any sort or from gambling or betting of any form or nature whatsoever shall be allowed in computing the said income.
The prohibition will not, however, apply in respect of the income of an assessee, being the owner of race horses, from the activity of owning and maintaining such horses. In respect of the activity of owning and maintaining race horses, expenses incurred shall be allowed even in the absence of any stake money earned. Such loss shall be allowed to be carried forward in accordance with the provisions of section 74A.


DEEMED INCOME CHARGEABLE TO TAX [SECTION 59]:The provisions of section 41(1) are made applicable, so far as may be, to the computation of income under this head. Accordingly, where a deduction has been made in respect of a loss, expenditure or liability and subsequently any amount is received or benefit is derived in respect of such expenditure incurred or loss or trading liability allowed as deduction, then it shall be deemed as income in the year in which the amount is received or the benefit is accrued.


SIFNIFICANT CASE LAWS:
1)PCIT v. Dr. Ranjan Pai (2021) 431 ITR 250 (Karn):
Issue:Can bonus shares received by shareholders be taxable under the head ‘Income from other sources’ as per the provisions of section 56(2)(x), as they are received without consideration?
Analysis & Decision:The issue of bonus shares by capitalization of reserves is merely a reallocation of the company's funds. There is no inflow of fresh funds or increase in the capital employed, which remains the same. Thus, there is no addition or alteration to the profit-making apparatus and the total funds available with the company remain the same. On the other hand, when a shareholder gets bonus shares, the value of the original shares held by him goes down and the market value as well as intrinsic value of the two shares put together will be the same or nearly the same as the value of original share before the issue of bonus shares. Thus, any profit derived by the assessee shareholder on account of receipt of bonus shares is adjusted by depreciation in the value of equity shares originally held by him. Hence, the provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not be attracted in the hands of the recipient shareholders on receipt of bonus shares. Note - This decision was rendered in the context of section 56(2)(vii); however, the underlying principle emanating therefrom applies with equal force in the context of the present provisions contained in section 56(2(x). Accordingly, the issue and decision has been presented with reference to section 56(2)(x).

2)CIT v. Sree Rama Multi Tech Ltd. (2018) 403 ITR 426 (SC):
Issue:Is interest income from share application money deposited in bank eligible for set-off against public issue expenses or should such interest be subject to tax under the head ‘Income from Other Sources’?
Analysis & Decision:The assessee-company was statutorily required to keep share application money in a separate account till the allotment of shares was completed. Part of the share application money would normally have to be returned to unsuccessful applicants, and therefore, the entire share application money would not ultimately be appropriated by the company. The interest earned was inextricably linked with the requirement of raising share capital. Any surplus money deposited in the bank for the purpose of earning interest is liable to be taxed as ―Income from Other Sources‖. Here, the share application money was deposited with the bank not to make additional income but to comply with the statute. The interest accrued on such deposit is merely incidental. Moreover, the issue of shares relates to capital structure of the company and hence, expenses incurred in connection with the issue of shares are to be capitalized. Accordingly, the accrued interest is not liable to be taxed as “Income from Other Sources”; the same is eligible to be set-off against public issue expenses.

3)Movaliya Bhikhubhai Balabhai v. ITO (TDS) (2016) 388 ITR 343 (Guj):
Issue:Is interest on enhanced compensation u/s 28 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 assessable as capital gains or as income from other sources?
Analysis & Decision:The assessee has received interest u/s 28 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 which represents enhanced value of land and thus, partakes the character of compensation and not interest. Hence, interest u/s 28 is liable to be taxed under the head of „Capital Gains‟ and not under ‗Income from Other Sources‘. On the other hand, interest u/s 34 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 is for the delay in making payment after the compensation amount is determined. Such amount is liable to be taxed under the head ‗Income from Other Sources‘. Note: The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 has now been repealed and replaced by the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013. Section 72 and Section 80 of the new legislation have similar provisions regarding award of interest.


4)CIT v. Parle Plastics Ltd. (2011) 332 ITR 63 (Bom.):
Issue:What are the tests for determining ―substantial part of business‖ of lending company for the purpose of application of exclusion provision u/s 2(22)?
Analysis & Decision:U/s 2(22), ―dividend‖ does not include, inter alia, any advance or loan made to a shareholder by a company in the ordinary course of its business, where the lending of money is a substantial part of the business of the company. Percentage of turnover in relation to the whole as also the percentage of the profit in relation to the whole and sometimes even percentage of manpower used for a particular part of the business in relation to the total manpower or work force of the company would be required to be taken into consideration for determining the substantial part of business. The capital employed for a specific division of a company in comparison to total capital employed would also be relevant to determine whether the part of the business constitutes a substantial part.

5)CIT v. Vir Vikram Vaid (2014) 367 ITR 365 (Bom):
Issue:Can repair and renovation expenses incurred by a company in respect of premises leased out by a shareholder having substantial interest in the company, be treated as	deemed
dividend?
Analysis & Decision:The expenditure incurred by virtue of repairs and renovation on the premises cannot be brought within the definition of advance or loan given to the shareholder having substantial interest in the company, though he is the owner of the premises. It cannot be treated as payment by the company on behalf of the shareholder or for the individual benefit of such shareholder.
Accordingly, the repair and renovation expenses in respect of premises owned by the shareholder having substantial interest in the company and occupied by the company cannot be treated as deemed dividend.

6)Pradip Kumar Malhotra v. CIT (2011) 338 ITR 538 (Cal.):
Issue:Can the loan or advance given to a shareholder by the company, in return for an advantage conferred on the company by the shareholder, be deemed as dividend under	section 2(22)(e)?
Analysis & Decision:The phrase "by way of advance or loan" appearing in section 2(22)(e) must be construed to mean those advances or loans which a shareholder enjoys simply on account of being a person who is the beneficial owner of shares (not being shares entitled to a fixed rate of dividend whether with or without a right to participate in profits) holding not less than 10% of the voting power. In case such loan or advance is given to such shareholder as a consequence of any further consideration which is beneficial to the company received from such a shareholder, such advance or loan cannot be deemed as dividend within the meaning of the Act.
Thus, only gratuitous loan or advance given by a company to a shareholder, who is the beneficial owner of shares holding not less than 10% of the voting power, would come within the purview of section 2(22)(e) but not cases where the loan or advance is given in return for an advantage conferred upon the company by such shareholder.

7)CIT v. Ambassador Travels (P) Ltd. (2009) 318 ITR 376 (Del.):
Issue:Would the provisions of deemed dividend u/s 2(22)(e) be attracted in respect of financial transactions entered into in the normal course of business?
Analysis & Decision:U/s 2(22)(e), loans and advances made out of accumulated profits of a company in which public are not substantially interested to a beneficial owner of shares holding not less than 10% of the voting power or to a concern in which such shareholder has substantial interest is deemed as dividend. However, this provision would not apply in the case of advance made in the course of the assessee‘s business as a trading transaction.
The assessee was involved in booking of resorts for the customers of these companies and entered into normal business transactions as a part of its day-to-day business activities. Such financial transactions cannot under any circumstances be treated as loans or advances received by the assessee from these concerns for the purpose of application of section 2(22)(e).

8)CIT v. Manjoo and Co. (2011) 335 ITR 527 (Kerala):
Issue:Can winnings of prize money on unsold lottery tickets held by the distributor of lottery tickets be assessed as business income and be subject to normal rates of tax instead of the rates prescribed u/s 115BB?
Analysis and decision:The receipt of the prize money is not in his capacity as a lottery distributor but as a holder of the lottery ticket which won the prize. The Lottery Department also does not treat it as business income received by the distributor but instead treats it as prize money paid on which tax is deducted at source.
Further, winnings from lotteries are assessable under the special provisions of section 115BB, irrespective of the head under which such income falls.


Further analysis and understanding-

Savings Bank Account – Interest Income:Interest that gets accumulated in your savings bank account must be declared in your tax return under income from other sources. Note that the bank does not deduct TDS from savings bank interest. Interest from fixed deposits and recurring deposits is taxable, while interest from savings bank accounts and post office deposits is tax-deductible to a certain extent. However, they are shown as under income from other sources. Interest income from a savings bank account or a fixed deposit or from a post office savings account are all shown under this head.

Deduction on Interest Income Under Section 80TTA:
For a residential individual (age of 60 years or less) or HUF, interest earned upto Rs 10,000 in a financial year is exempt from tax. The deduction is allowed on interest income earned from:
-savings account with a bank;
-savings account with a co-operative society carrying on the business of banking; or
-savings account with a post office
Senior citizens are not entitled to benefits under section 80TTA.

Tax on Fixed Deposits:Fixed deposit interest that you receive is added along with other income that you have, such as salary or professional income, and you’ll have to pay tax on that income at a tax rate that applies to you. TDS is deducted on interest income when it is earned, though it may not have been paid. Example: The bank will deduct TDS on interest accrued each year on a FD for 5 years. Therefore, it is advisable to pay your taxes annually instead of only paying them when the FD matures. With effect from 1 April 2018, senior citizens will enjoy an income tax exemption of up to Rs 50,000 on the interest income they receive from savings bank accounts, fixed deposits, recurring deposits with banks, post offices, etc., under Section 80TTB.

Avoiding TDS on Fixed Deposits:Banks are required to deduct tax when interest income from deposits held in all the bank branches put together is more than Rs.40,000 in a year (Prior to FY 2019-20, it was Rs.10,000). A 10% TDS is deducted if PAN details are available. It is 20% if the bank does not have your PAN details. The details of TDS deducted on Fixed Deposit Interest is in the Form 26AS.If your total income is below the taxable limit, you can avoid tax deduction on fixed deposits by submitting Form 15G and Form 15H to the bank requesting them not to deduct any TDS. Form 15H is for senior citizens (60 years or older);  Form 15G is for everybody else. These forms are for residents only and for those whose taxes add up to zero. These forms must be submitted at the start of the financial year. If you missed submitting them, then you can claim a refund by filing an income tax return. These forms are valid for one year only. Therefore, they must be submitted each year to keep banks from deducting tax.

Reporting Fixed Deposit and Recurring Deposits in Your Tax Return:
-Reporting Fixed Deposits:If you have three FDs open, then add up all the interest income and enter it under ‘Other interest income’.
-Reporting recurring deposit:starting June 2015, when interest income from all the branches of the bank including from recurring deposits, exceeds Rs.10,000 in a financial year, a 10% tax on interest earned will be deducted. The interest earned should be shown in ‘income from other sources.


Exempt Income:The PPF and EPF amount you withdraw after maturity is exempt from tax and must be declared as exempt income from income from other sources. Note that: The EPF is only tax-exempt after five years of continuous service.Emplyees' Provident Fund (EPF) is a retirement fund for salaried employees. Every month, 12% of the employee's basic salary is contributed to the EPF account. The employer will also contribute 12% of the employee's salary towards EPF. Contribution towards an EPF account provides a benefit to individuals by way of a deduction under Section 80C. Employees can also contribute over and above the minimum contribution set by the EPFO, it is called as Voluntary Provident Fund (VPF).It would also be good to know what would be the income tax or TDS implications of EPF withdrawal.Interestingly, EPF withdrawal is taxable under certain circumstances and exempt under certain circumstances.

Eligibility for EPF Withdrawal:An employee must fulfil the following conditions to withdraw the entire EPF funds:
-The entire EPF amount can be withdrawn upon retirement. The retirement age fixed by the EPFO is 55 years.
-An employee can withdraw 90% of the EPF funds one year before retirement after attaining 54 years.
-An employee can withdraw 75% of the EPF amount after one month of unemployment. The remaining money will be transferred to the PF account of the new job.
-An employee can withdraw the entire EPF amount after two months of unemployment.
-EPF amount can be withdrawn without the employer’s consent by obtaining approval online when the Aadhar is linked with the UAN, and the employer has approved it.

Reasons for Partial Withdrawal of EPF:An employee can withdraw EPF partially for the following reasons upon fulfilment of certain conditions:
-Medical purposes
-Marriage
-Education
-Purchase of land or purchase/construction of house
-Home loan repayment
-House renovation

Tax on EPF Withdrawal:Your EPF payout has 3 components:
-Your contribution/employee’s contribution
-Interest on your/employee’s contribution
-Employers contribution and interest on employer’s contribution

Your contribution/Employee’s contribution - This is the amount contributed by you to your EPF. This portion of your withdrawal is not taxable. However, if you have claimed deduction under section 80C on your contribution in earlier years, you may have to pay additional tax as if 80C was not claimed by you for those years.
Interest on your/employee’s contribution- This portion is taxed as income from other sources.
Employer’s contribution and interest on employer’s contribution - Employer’s contribution and interest on it is fully taxable. It is taxed under the head salary in your tax return. When TDS is deducted on it, you are likely to see an entry under salary TDS in your Form 26AS for it.

Tax on EPF withdrawal before 5 years:If you withdraw from EPF before completing 5 years of continuous service, TDS will be deducted. However, no TDS will be deducted when the amount is less than Rs.50,000. In calculating 5 years of service, your tenure with the previous employer is also included. If you transfer your EPF balance from the old employer to a new employer and your total employment is 5 years or more, no TDS is deducted. Do remember that you must calculate the exact 5 years, there is no grace if you are short by a few days.


Tax on EPF withdrawal by temporary employee:When you are hired for a temporary position or on contract for a certain period, you are not in the permanent rolls of the employer. Thus, the employer is not liable to contribute towards your EPF. However, you are brought on rolls by the employer after some time of your employment, and your employer begins your EPF contribution, but you resign after completing 5 years. In such a case, the period for calculating 5 years should be done from the date of joining as a permanent employee not from the date of hiring to the temporary position.

Tax on EPF withdrawal from an unrecognised EPF:A fund which is not approved by the Commissioner of Income Tax is considered an unrecognised provident fund. It may have been recognised by the commissioner of the provident fund or any other formal authority. But for a fund to enjoy the income tax benefits of a recognised provident fund (where withdrawals are exempt from tax after 5 years), it must be approved by a Commissioner of Income Tax. If you are a member of the Unrecognised Provident Fund (URPF), your withdrawals are taxed whether or not you have completed 5 years of service. 

Tax on EPF withdrawal after 5 years:The EPF withdrawal is exempt from tax when an employee withdraws the amount after 5 years of continuous service.

Rates of TDS:TDS is deducted @ 10% on EPF balance if withdrawn before 5 years of service, and the amount is above Rs.50,000. Remember to mention your PAN at the time of withdrawal. If PAN is not provided, TDS shall be deducted at the highest slab rate of 30%. You can submit Form 15G/Form 15H if the tax on your total income, including EPF withdrawal, is nil. TDS is not deducted if Form 15G/Form 15H is submitted.

Table on taxability on withdrawal of EPF:
-Amount withdrawn is < Rs 50,000 before completion of 5 continuous years of service=No TDS. However, If the individual falls under the taxable bracket, he has to offer such EPF withdrawal in his return of income.
-Amount withdrawn is > Rs 50,000 before completion of 5 years of continuous service=TDS @ 10% if PAN is furnished; No TDS in case Form 15G/15H is furnished.
-Withdrawal of EPF after 5 years of continuous service=No TDS. Further, the individual need not offer the same in the return of income as such withdrawal is exempt from tax
-Transfer of PF from one account to another upon a change of job=No TDS.Further, the individual need not offer the same in return of income as it is not taxable.
-Before completion of 5 continuous years of service\if employment is terminated due to employee’s ill health\The business of the employer is discontinued\the reasons for withdrawal are beyond the employee’s control=No TDS,Further, the individual need not offer the same in the return of income as such withdrawal is exempt from tax.

How to avoid TDS on EPF withdrawal?:Here are a few ways of avoiding TDS on EPF withdrawal:
-When you change jobs, try not to withdraw the EPF amount and transfer it to the new account at your new company.
-If you can defer withdrawing funds from your account for five years (continuous service with all employers), withdrawals thereafter will not attract any TDS.
-If withdrawal amount is less than Rs 50,000, no TDS is deducted.


Family Pension:If you are collecting a pension on behalf of someone who is deceased, then you must show this income under income from other sources. There is a deduction of Rs 15,000 or one-third of the family pension received whichever is lower from the Family Pension Income. This will be added to the taxpayer’s income and tax must be paid at the tax rate that is applicable.

Taxation of Winnings from Lottery, Game Shows, Puzzles - Casual Income:If you receive money from winning the lottery, Online/TV game shows, races including horse races, card games and other games, gambling betting, etc., it will be taxable under the head Income from other Sources. The income will be taxable at the flat rate of 30%, which after adding cess, will amount to 31.2%


Expenses allowed to be deducted from certain income sources:Similar to freelancers and businesses who can deduct certain expenses from their income, a taxpayer earning income from other sources can claim deductions for expenses as given below:
-Expenses (not capital expenses) such as repairs, insurance premium, and depreciation in respect of plant, machinery, furniture and buildings are deductible from rental income earned by    letting out of plant, machinery, furniture and building.
-The rental income from the plant and machinery is chargeable to tax under income from other sources. The expenses incurred in respect of such plant and machinery are allowed to be deducted.
-A standard deduction is allowed on family pension, i.e. a deduction which is the lower of Rs.15,000 and one-third of such income is available in case of income in the nature of family pension which is paid monthly to the family members of a deceased employee.
-In case, interest on compensation or enhanced compensation is received, 50% of the interest is allowed to be deducted (applicable starting from the assessment year 2010-11).
-As per Section 57(iii), a deduction is allowed for any other expense (which is not a capital expense) which has been spent wholly and exclusively for making or earning such income.

Dividend Income:Dividends received from investments, such as stocks, are taxed under “income from other sources”. However, as of the recent removal of the Dividend Distribution Tax (DDT), individuals receiving dividends need to include them in their total income and pay tax based on their applicable slab rates. Taxpayers can claim interest expense up to 20% of the dividend income. Also, if the total dividend amount exceeds Rs 5,000, the company deducts TDS at 10% while paying the dividend.

Agriculture income:As per the Income-tax law, agricultural income covers 3 main activities:

-Rent or revenue earned from agricultural land situated in India.
-Income from agricultural activities such as the cultivation of the land, tilling of the land, sowing of seeds, planting, etc., and also includes subsequent operations which would make the product fit for use in the market like tending, pruning, cutting, harvesting, etc. Income derived from saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery would also be considered to be agricultural income.
-Income derived from farm building required for agricultural operations.

Agriculture is said to be the primary occupation in India. It is usually the only source of income for the large rural population in India. The country as a whole is entirely dependent on agriculture for its basic food requirements. The government has numerous schemes, policies and other measures to promote growth in this sector – one of them being an exemption from income tax. It may seem like the fact that exemption to income tax is all that we need to know when it comes to the taxation of agricultural income but there is more to it. Let us take a look at the provisions of the law in this regard.

Meaning of Agricultural Income:The Income-tax Act has its own definition of agricultural income which constitutes the following 3 main activities:
I. Rent or revenue earned from agricultural land situated in India: Rent is the amount received to grant the right to use the land. There are many possible sources of income that can be derived from land. An example would be fees received for renewal of grant of land on lease. However, the amount received on the sale of land is not covered under the definition of agricultural income. 
II.Income from agricultural land in the following ways:
Agriculture: The meaning of agriculture though not covered in the Act, has been laid down by the Supreme Court in the case CIT v. Raja Benoy Kumar Sahas Roy where agriculture has been explained to consist of two types of operations –basic operations and subsequent operations.
-The basic operations would include cultivation of the land and consequently tilling of the land, sowing of seeds, planting and all such operations that require human skill and effort directly on the land itself.
-The subsequent operations would include operations that are carried out for growth and preservation of the produce like weeding, digging soil around the crops grown etc and also those operations which would make the product fit for use in the market like tending, pruning, cutting, harvesting, etc. Income derived from saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery would also be considered to be agricultural income whether or not the basic operations were carried out on land.

Through the performance of a process by the cultivator or the receiver of rent (in-kind) that results in the agricultural produce being fit to be taken to the market: Such processes involve manual or mechanical operations that are ordinarily employed to make the agricultural produce fit for the market and the original character of such produce is retained.

Through the sale of such agricultural produce: Where the produce does not undergo ordinary processes employed to become marketable, the income arising on sale would generally be partly agricultural (exempt) income and part of it will be non-agricultural (taxable) income.

The Income Tax has prescribed rules to make this bifurcation regarding agricultural and non-agricultural produce for products like tea, coffee, rubber, etc.
-Growing and Manufacturing Tea= the Agriculture Income will be 60% and Non-Agricultural Income will be 40%.
-Manufacturing Rubber=the Agriculture Income will be 65% and Non-Agricultural Income will be 35%.
-Growing and curing Coffee=the Agriculture Income will be 75% and Non-Agricultural Income will be 25%.
-Coffee grown, cured, roasted, and grounded with or without mixing chicory or other flavouring ingredients=the Agriculture Income will be 60% and Non-Agricultural Income will be 40%.


Income derived from farm building required for agricultural operations:The conditions for classifying income derived from farm building as agricultural income are as follows:
-The building should be on or in the surrounding area of the agricultural land. Also, the rent receiver or cultivator of the land, by reason of his connection with the land, requires the building as a house to stay or as a storehouse or uses it for these kinds of situations
-Either of the two conditions should be satisfied:
(a)The land is assessed by either land revenue or a local rate assessed and collected by government officers; OR
(b)If the above condition is not satisfied, the land should not be located within the following region:(Municipality includes municipal corporation, notified area committee, town area committee, town committee and cantonment board.)
-Aerial distance from municipality within 2 Kms = Population as per last preceding census is 10,000 to 1,00,000.
-Aerial distance from municipality within 6 Kms = Population as per last preceding census is 1,00,000 to 10,00,000.
-Aerial distance from municipality within 8 Kms = Population as per last preceding census is more than 10,00,000.

Note: Even where the local population is < 10,000, the land should also not be situated within the jurisdiction of the local municipality or cantonment board.
In cases where the activities have only some distant relation to land like dairy farming, breeding, rearing of livestock, poultry farming, etc. they do not form a part of agriculture income.
Indirect connection with land :We have seen above that agricultural income is exempt, whether it is received by the tiller or the landlord. However, non-agricultural income does not become agricultural merely on account of its indirect connection with the land. The following examples will illustrate the above point. 
Example: A rural society has its principal business of selling butter which was made from the cream sold to them by farmers. The making of butter was a factory process separated from the farm. The butter resulting from the factory operations separated from the farm was not an agricultural product and the society was, therefore, not entitled to exemption under section 10(1) in respect of such income.

Example: X was the managing agent of a company. He was entitled to a commission at the rate of 10% p.a. on the annual net profits of the company. A part of the company’s income was agricultural income. X claimed that since his remuneration was calculated with reference to the income of the company, part of which was agricultural income, such part of the commission as was proportionate to the agricultural income was exempt from income tax. Since X received remuneration under a contract for personal service calculated on the amount of profits earned by the company; such remuneration does not constitute agricultural income.

Example: In regard to forest trees of spontaneous growth, which grow on the soil without any human skill and labour, there is no cultivation of the soil at all. Even though operations in the nature of forestry operations performed by the assessee may have the effect of nursing and fostering the growth of such forest trees, it cannot constitute agricultural operations. Income from the sale of such forest trees of spontaneous growth does not, therefore, constitute agricultural income.

Examples of Agricultural Income:The following are some the examples of agricultural income:
-Income from the sale of seeds.
-Income from the sale of replanted trees.
-Interest on capital received by a partner from a firm engaged in agricultural operations.
-Income from growing flowers and creepers.
-Rent received for agricultural land.
-Profits received by a partner from a firm involved in agrarian produce or activities.
-Income from growing of bamboo.

Examples of Non-Agricultural Income:Below are some examples of non-agricultural income:
-Income from poultry farming.
-Income from agricultural land held as stock-in-trade
-Any dividend paid from an organization’s agriculture income.
-Income from dairy farming.
-Income from bee hiving.
-Income from fisheries.
-Income from cutting and selling timber trees.
-Income from butter and cheese making.
-Receipts from TV serial shooting in the farmhouse.

Taxation of Agricultural Income:As discussed above, agricultural income is exempt from income tax.However, the Income-tax Act has laid down a method to indirectly tax such income. This method or concept may be called the partial integration of agricultural income with non-agricultural income. It aims at taxing the non-agricultural income at higher rates of tax. 
Applicability:This method is applicable to individuals, HUFs, AOPs, BOIs, and artificial juridical persons, when the following conditions are met:
-Net agricultural income is greater than Rs. 5,000 during the year; and
-Non-agricultural income is above the basic exemption limit:
a)Greater than Rs 2.5 lakh for individuals below 60 years of age and all other applicable persons
b)Greater than Rs 3 lakh for individuals between 60 – 80 years of age
c)Greater than Rs 5 lakh for individuals above 80 years of age
In simple terms, the non-agricultural income should be greater than the maximum amount not chargeable to tax (as per the slab rates). Thus companies, firms/LLP, co-operative societies, and local authorities are excluded from using this method.


Calculation of Agricultural Income:
Step 1:Calculate Tax on: (non-agriculture income + net agricultural income)
Step2: Calculate tax on: (net agricultural income + Maximum exemption limit as per slab rate)
Step3:Calculate Final tax in step 1 - step 2 as above and: then reduce (-)rebate,if available (+) Surcharge, as applicable (+) Education and secondary and higher education cess.

Example:Income from other sources is Rs.7,00,000 and Net agriculture income Rs.2,00,000. The calculation of agriculture relief and net tax payable under the old tax regime is as follows
-Total taxes on Rs.9,00,000 (Non-agricultural income + net agricultural income) = Rs.92,500 (before education cess @ 4%)
-Total taxes on Rs.4,50,000 (Basic exemption limit + net agricultural income) = Rs.10,000 (before education cess @ 4%)
-Net tax payable shall be Rs.82,500 (Rs.92,500 - Rs.10,000) + education cess @ 4%
Tax liability on agricultural income over and above the basic exemption limit shall be allowed as a relief. The higher the proportion of agriculture income in your total income higher the agriculture tax relief one can enjoy. 

Which ITR to File for Agricultural Income?:Agricultural income is to be shown under the column of Agriculture Income in ITR 1. But ITR 1 applies only when the agricultural income is up to Rs 5,000. In case it exceeds the limit of Rs.5,000, ITR 2 form must be filed.

Tax Benefit Under Section 54B: Section 54B provides relief of capital gains to taxpayers who sell their agricultural land and acquire another agricultural land from the sale proceeds. The conditions for claiming the benefit u/s 54B are:
-The taxpayer should be an individual or HUF.
-The asset transferred should be agricultural land, whether a long-term or short-term capital asset. 
-The agricultural land should be used for agricultural purposes for at least two years immediately preceding the date of transfer of land.
-The taxpayer should acquire/purchase another agricultural land within two years from the transfer date.

The exemption amount under section 54B is the lower of the following:
-Amount of capital gains arising on transfer of agricultural land.
-Investment in a new agricultural land or the amount deposited in the Capital Gains Deposit Account Scheme.


Union Budget Highlights for 2023-24:The Union Budget 2023-24 highlighted the following points regarding the agricultural sector:The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, including Agricultural Education and Research, has been allocated approximately Rs. 1.25 lakh crore. A significant development for the agricultural industry is the creation of an Agriculture Accelerator Fund aimed at promoting startups led by young entrepreneurs in rural areas.


Virtual Digital Assets (VDAs):The virtual digital asset shall mean a cryptocurrency, NFT, etc. Any profit or loss from the sale of VDAs shall be charged to income tax @ 30% subject to the conditions on set off of losses against the incomes.
The Finance act 2022 introduced section 115BBH and it will be applicable from AY 2023-24. The section provides that the income on the transfer of the virtual digital asset (VDA) will be taxable at the rate of 30 percent. The taxpayer cannot take the deduction in respect of any expenditure other than the cost of acquisition. The loss from the transfer of VDA will not be allowed to set off against any other income (such as capital gain, profit from the business, profession, salary, or any other income from other sources) and such loss cannot be carried forward to the succeeding assessment years.
The Finance act 2022 also provides the mechanism to deduct the TDS on the transfer of VDA under section 194S. The threshold limit is Rs 50,000 and it has to be seen on the aggregate value of the consideration payable on the transfer of VDA.
Section 56(2)(X) of the IT act would be also applicable to Virtual digital assets. This means that receiving the VDA without consideration will invite the gift tax in the hands of the recipient if the fair market value of the assets exceeds fifty thousand rupees.The imposition of such taxes on virtual digital assets has been done to regulate this dynamic and sophisticated market. Such action of the government invites both negative as well as positive views from the crypto community but many professionals in the crypto community believe that the introduction of taxation on the transfer of Virtual digital assets is an excellent move and will provide clarity to the investors on how their income would be taxed which is the most disputed and controversial before the budget’s announcement. But We still need clarity as most of the things are vague.
Taxability of Airdrops: Usually, when any new cryptocurrency comes into the market, they are freely distributed among the users. It is done to promote (making the people aware of the new cryptocurrency or token) and make the initial market for the coins. This free giveaway can be of coins or tokens. The new coins or tokens are directly transferred to the wallets of the recipient. It can be offered for free or for a small amount of consideration or participation in the crypto community or return of any small service. Sometimes, these coins are also offered for undertaking marketing activities such as posting on social media, conducting seminars or workshops, or making other crypto enthusiasts participate in the project. In short, the consideration paid by the recipient for receiving such tokens or coins is mostly non-monetary. Mostly, the recipients provide their time and mind for the benefit of the whole project. Here, the question arises that how this will be taxable at the time of receipt and sale. Sec 56(2)(x) will be applicable in the hands of the recipients at the time of receipt from the issuer of the coins or tokens. It is because recipients have not provided any monetary consideration to receive such coins or tokens. After that, if the recipient sells the same tokens or coins received in Airdrop to someone else, the normal tax rate of 30% would be applicable on such a sale.As per sec 56(2)(x), The coins or tokens received till the fair market value of Rs. 50000 shall not be taxable but excess of it would be wholly taxable in the hands of the recipient. However, as per industry norms, getting free coins or tokens is not easy. The users have to participate in a lot of projects and might need to incur certain costs such as gas fees, account fees, and listing fees. Hence, the questions arise that what could be considered as consideration for receiving such tokens or coins. Whether the non-monetary services provided by the recipient can be considered as ‘consideration’ for the purpose of section 56(2)(x). How will we evaluate the fair market value of the new coins at the time of free distribution? Here, we can’t take the value from the open market as these coins or tokens would be at their initial level and taking the open market price might lead to absurdity. In various instances, the courts have held the non-monetary benefit as ‘consideration’ for the purpose of section 56 and decided that no gift tax would be chargeable on such transactions. The legislature will have to provide the proper mechanism to calculate the fair value otherwise it would lead to confusion and a breakdown of the structure.
Gas fees:The gas fee is paid at the time of acquisition of any token or smart contract on the Ethereum network. The gas fee is like the transaction fee charged by the banks or any other financial institution to carry out the activity or transaction on our behalf. The gas fee directly goes into the pocket of the miners as they are the ones who are constantly employing their computing power to mine the smart contract on the block. Therefore, the gas fee is paid by the users to compensate for the computing power incurred by the miners. The longer the smart contract, the more gas would be required to validate the contract in the block. It fluctuates from time to time depending on the traffic on the network as the miner will validate the smart contracts of the users first, who will offer more gas prices as compared to other users.
The gas fee is a very major cost which might cost something around 10 dollars to 16 dollars for only a single NFT (non-fungible token) or fungible token or smart contract. The gas fee is unrelated to the price of the NFTs or any other assets. The price of one gas is equivalent to 70 to 200 gwei (gwei is the unit of measurement) and to purchase the NFT, the minimum gas limit is 21,000 gas. Thus, the total cost for purchasing an asset will be 4200000 gwei (21000 gas * 200 gwei). One gwei is equal to 10-9 Ethereum. Therefore, the total gas fees for purchasing the NFT will be 0.0042 Ethereum (4200000 * 10 -9), which is something around 14 to 17 dollars. The gas price increases as the gas limit to validate the contract increases. 
There is no doubt that any payment made for the purchase before the sale of the coins or tokens to the other person would be considered as a “cost of acquisition”, but can the gas fee be included in the cost of acquisition? It should be but still, there is no clarity, and the legislature has not provided the proper framework to calculate the amount on which the tax has to be imposed. Similarly, doubt can be raised about the Account fees and listing fees. 
The account fee is mainly charged by the NFTs’ marketplaces such as Open Sea and Binance etc. The listing fee is charged at the time of the listing of NFTs. Such fees are integral and if such fees are not incurred, the NFT would not be formed in the first place. It is difficult to hold that such costs would not form part of the cost of acquisition. The position will become clear as time will pass.

Taxability regarding lending/borrowing and pledging of VDA:The TDS will not be deducted on lending/borrowing and pledging of the VDA as per section 194S of the IT act. The lending/borrowing and pledging of the VDA cannot be considered a “Transfer “as the ownership or title of the VDA is not transferred to the borrower. The same has also been confirmed in CIRCULAR NO. 751, DATED 10-2-1997. As per the circular, the transaction of lending and borrowing cannot be considered as an ‘exchange’ of an asset.

The extract of the circular which discusses this issue – “The transaction of lending shares of some distinctive numbers and receiving back shares of some other numbers is not “exchange” of assets within the meaning of “transfer” as defined in section 2(47) of the Income-tax Act. The meaning of the word “exchange” necessarily involves exchange of two different assets. The asset received back in the aforesaid type of transaction is no different from what was lent so long as it represents the same fraction of the ownership of the company. At no stage, the lender or borrower intended to “exchange” different assets. Hence, the transaction of lending of shares or any other security under the securities lending scheme would not result in “transfer” for the purpose of invoking the provisions relating to capital gains under the Income-tax Act.” The same ratio can be adopted in this case as well. The meaning of exchange as per the Black’s Law Dictionary is – “the act of transferring interests, each in consideration for the other”. Hence, once the transaction is not “transfer”, the transaction will not come under the ambit of section 194S of the income tax act. Therefore, no TDS has to be deducted on lending/borrowing and pledging of the VDA. This question becomes very important as the new virtual economy is getting created around the blockchain in the form of Decentralized apps (DAPPs), metaverse, Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs), etc. Various known liquidity pools such as Aave, Bancor and Uniswap, etc. provides facilitation service for lending and borrowing of crypto assets. The Government has to clarify this position otherwise it will cause huge hardship to Defi liquidity pools discussed above as it will hamper their basic activity of lending and borrowing. 

Initial Coin Offering:Initial coin offering is the most fascinating concept in the world of crypto and the most misunderstood concept by the novice. Initial coin offering is just a glamorous name for “token sale” or “token offering”. In the Initial coin offering, the person has to pay the price for the purchase of the tokens, initially generated by the promoter of the project. It is very different from airdrop as discussed in the above para, as in airdrop, the recipient doesn’t incur any monetary cost apart from hiThe Initial coin offering is available to the public at large against the airdrop, where only a small group of people are enjoying the privilege. It is not like the Initial public offering in the case of the primary market for the company’s shares, where coins are sold like shares of the company. The token sale is mostly conducted by the promoters who are developing new projects or platforms, as most of the activities (buying and selling) on the platform will be carried out by using the tokens issued by the promoters. It is like going to a food stall, where the shop owner Exchanges your fiat currency with the food token and then you can exchange your food token for your favorite food. Let’s take a real-world example – brave browser. The browser provides BAT (Basic attention token) to the users when they open advertisements in the brave browser. The BAT can be used to purchase advertisement space on web pages. The BAT is like the unit of currency for undertaking any transaction in the brave browser. If you don’t need BAT, you can also convert it into Ethereum afterward. The token sale helps the promoters to establish their basic market (creating the demand and supply), indirectly financing their working capital needs. Nowadays, the tokens are generated on the Ethereum blockchain following the ERC-20 standard.s/her time and energy. Applying for ICOs is not as easy as we might think. The whole transaction can be divided into two legs. On the first leg, we have to convert our fiat currency into the other cryptocurrency i.e., Ethereum or bitcoin and on the second leg, we are supposed to purchase the tokens from the coins purchased in the first leg. On the second leg, we can see that one virtual digital asset is exchanged for another virtual digital asset. Here, two parties are involved. One party is providing Ethereum and receiving tokens and another party is providing tokens and receiving Ethereum.Section 194S is not very clear on how the TDS has to be deducted when one VDA is exchanged for another VDA. Circular no. 13/2022 provides that in a situation where one VDA is being exchanged with another VDA, both the persons are buyer as well as seller. Thus, both need to pay tax with respect to transfer of VDA and show the evidence to the other so that VDAs can then be exchanged. This would then be required to be reported in the TDS statement along with the challan number. This year Form No. 26Q has included provisions for reporting such transactions. For specified persons, Form No. 26QE has been introduced. Thus, TDS has to be deducted by both parties in the second leg.But the circular has not made it clear how TDS would have to be deducted in the case where the project lies completely outside India. As per DTAA, there should be no TDS liability in such cases but it still needs further clarification & discussion and it might differ from country to country.
The same problem also arises in the NFTs, as to purchase the same, the Ethereum coins have to be transferred to the meta mask (meta mask is the special wallet for holding the NFTs) and then the Ethereum coins in the wallet are used to purchase the selected NFT. Here, also one VDA (Ethereum) is transferred to purchase another VDA (NFT). Various platforms from where one can purchase NFTs lies completely  outside India.
To deal with such a problem, a very careful interpretation of sec 194S and DTAA is required, and the legislature will have to issue proper notifications and guidelines in this regard otherwise, the government might lose huge revenue concerning this. There is also no proper mechanism on how the non-residents will deduct TDS if the consideration is received from a resident for buying the VDA from them.




Income from Gifts:In India, income tax is charged on gift transactions. Although there are few exceptions, one has to pay tax on certain gifts received in India. Even a casual exchange of money between friends and family members can bring tax incidence on the person receiving the gift.Gift tax in India was introduced in the year 1958 and was abolished in 1998. The government reintroduced it in the year 2004 under the head "Income from other sources". Receiving or sending gifts can be a part of money laundering or tax evasion, so the tax officers keep an eye on such transactions through the details filed under the income from other sources head.

What is Gift Tax?-1)Taxation rules on gifts exchange have been laid down under section 56 (2)(vi) of the Income Tax Act. It states that any gift received with or without consideration in excess of Rs 50,000 in a financial year will be added to your income from other sources and taxed according to your slab.
Who is eligible to pay?-Any individual receiving cash gifts exceeding Rs 50,000 in a single financial year will have to add this income to the gross total income and pay tax accordingly.
2)If the gift is received by an individual without any consideration and the fair market value of such gift is more than Rs 50,000 then the aggregate value will be taxable in the hands of such individual.
3)If the gift is received with consideration but for a value which is less than the fair market value and the difference exceeds Rs 50,000, the difference in the FMV and the consideration will be added to the income and taxed accordingly.

A detailed breakdown of the procedure for filling the tax:Here are few exceptions where no tax will be applied on the gift received: 1. Gifts received from the blood relatives 2. Gifts received on the occasion of marriage 3. Gifts received as inheritance or through a will The income from any such gifts will be added to your income from other sources and taxed according to your slab. You can use any ITR form to report such income and pay tax accordingly.



Tax on FD Interest: How to Pay Income Tax on Fixed Deposit Interest Income?:Fixed Deposits (FDs) allow you to exploit the complete potential of Section 80C to deduct Rs 1.5 lakh from your taxable income. It also ensures capital protection along with some interest returns. However, the interest income earned on the fixed deposit is taxable. Seldom do investors think about paying tax on the interest income on time. This article will cover when and how to pay income tax on FD interest income.
How is interest income taxed?:Interest income from fixed deposits is fully taxable. Add it to your total income and get taxed at slab rates applicable to your total income. It is to be reported under the head ‘Income from Other Sources’ in your Income Tax Return.Banks deduct tax at source at the time of crediting interest to your account if the amount of interest is beyond Rs 40,000 for individuals other than a senior citizen (in the case of senior citizen the threshold is Rs 50,000).Hence it should be remembered that the TDS is deducted at the time of credit of interest and not when the FD matures. So, if you have an FD for 3 years – banks shall deduct TDS at the end of each year. (See below for more details on TDS on FDs). 

Core Banking Solutions (CBS): CBS enables the banks to provide centralised services to their customers. In the case of the banking institution which has adopted Core Banking Solutions, the interest credited in respect of Fixed deposits by all the branches of the bank is aggregated to arrive at the total interest credited in order to know whether the aggregate amount comes within the ceiling limit for deducting TDS.It can be understood with the below example.
Mr. A made three fixed deposits of Rs 2,50,000 each at 9% with the Dwaraka, Janakpuri & Rohini branches of XYZ bank which has adopted CBS. In this case, despite of the annual interest being Rs 22,500 (i.e. 2,50,000*9/100) individually, which is within the prescribed limit of Rs 40,000, the bank needs to deduct TDS @ 10% under Section 194A considering the aggregate amount of interest credited by all branches exceeds the threshold limit of Rs 40,000.

Understanding TDS:When you receive certain payments, the person paying you has to deduct tax before making the payment. This tax deducted at source is called TDS, which they pay to the Central Government.You will receive the credit of the amount net of tax. You then have to add the gross amount to your income while reporting it in your income tax return. As against this, the credit of TDS is also provided from the total tax liability or a TDS refund is offered in case of nil tax liability.For example, if you earn FD interest of Rs 100, the bank would deduct 10% TDS i.e. Rs 10 and deposit it to the government. While reporting the interest income in ITR, you have to report the entire interest earned of Rs 100 in your ITR and claim the TDS deducted by the bank of Rs 10 as a TDS refund or tax credit from the outstanding liability, as the case may be. 

TDS on Recurring Deposits (RDs):Recurrent Deposits are deposits made on a recurring basis. For example, a Rs 10,000 per month RD. Interest on RDs is completely taxable according to your tax bracket. Senior citizens, on the other hand, are exempt from tax on the interest income from RDs/FDs up to Rs 50,000 per year. TDS provisions on RDs are the same as TDS provisions on FDs. TDS is levied on RDs if the interest payable in a single bank exceeds Rs 10,000.

How to calculate tax on interest income?:Add the interest income to your total income in your Income Tax Return each year (even though, it may not be paid out). Interest income is to be reported under the head ‘Income from other sources’ while filing ITR. See which tax slab rate you fall into. The income tax department will adjust the TDS (which has already been deducted) against your final tax liability.If the bank does not deduct TDS from your interest income, the total interest income earned from your fixed deposits in a particular financial year is to be added to your total income and pay tax on it. It is not advisable to wait until the maturity of your FD when interest is actually received– to report the interest income. This is because the accumulated interest may push you up to a higher slab and you may end up paying more tax.You can view the details of TDS deducted on any of your income by viewing your Form 26AS and total interest from FDs, RDs & savings bank accounts from your AIS.Let’s understand this by way of an example: Ritwik falls in the 20% tax bracket. He has 2 Fixed Deposits with a bank of Rs 1,00,000 each for a period of 3 years @ 6% interest per annum. In the first year, Ritwik’s interest income is Rs 6,000 from each of the FDs, total interest accrued is Rs 12,000 in the first year. The bank does not deduct TDS for annual FD interest below Rs 40,000. 
Another example, Mr. Anurag has a fixed deposit of Rs 10 lakh @ an interest rate of 6% p.a. He receives an annual interest of Rs 60,000. The bank deducts TDS on the whole of Rs 60,000  at 10% i.e. Rs.6,000. The prescribed rate of TDS is 10%. 

When to pay tax on interest income?If there is a tax liability on adding interest income to your total income, then the same is required to be paid while filing your income tax return for the financial year. This is how you can pay any tax that is due.However, if the tax payable after the inclusion of your interest income in your total income is more than Rs.10,000 – then you are liable to pay Advance Tax. Hence the rules of quarterly payment of advance tax in instalments are to be compiled. 

Understanding TDS in relation to FDs,When does the bank not deduct TDS:
If your interest income from all FDs with a bank is less than Rs 40,000 in a year, the bank cannot deduct any TDS. The limit is Rs 50,000 in the case of a senior citizen aged 60 years and above. It is governed by section 194A of the Income Tax Act.Prior to Budget 2019, the limit of TDS on interest income was Rs.10,000.

When does the bank deduct TDS @ 10%:The bank estimates your interest income for the year from all the FDs you have with the bank. There would be a 10% TDS deduction if your interest income exceeds Rs 40,000 (Rs 50,000 in the case of senior citizens). Prior to Budget 2019, the limit of TDS on interest income was Rs. 10,000. The threshold limit to make TDS on FDs is as below:
-Interest paid by Co-operative engaged in business and threshold limit for Senior citizen (Rs) is Rs 50,000 and for other person is Rs 40,000.
-Interest paid by Co-operative engaged in banking business and threshold limit for Senior citizen (Rs) is Rs 50,000 and for other person is Rs 40,000.
-Interest paid by Primary Agricultural Credit Society and threshold limit for Senior citizen (Rs) is Rs 50,000 and for other person is Rs 40,000.
-Interest paid by Co-op. Land Mortgage Bank and threshold limit for Senior citizen (Rs) is Rs 50,000 and for other person is Rs 40,000.
-Interest paid by Co-op. Land Development Bank and threshold limit for Senior citizen (Rs) is Rs 50,000 and for other person is Rs 40,000.

When does the bank deduct TDS @ 20%:In case you do not provide your PAN information to the bank, they will deduct 20% TDS. So make sure that the bank has your PAN details.
When your overall income is less than Rs. 2.5 lakh:No TDS is deductible when your total income is less than the minimum taxable amount. Some investors may have more than Rs 40,000 in interest income in a year, but their total income (including interest income) is less than the minimum exempt income (Rs 2.5 lakh for FY 2019-20).When there is no tax payable by the individual, the bank cannot deduct TDS. However, in such cases, the bank will not deduct TDS only where you submit Form 15G or 15H to claim interest income without TDS.

How to ensure zero TDS deduction by the bank:The only way to make sure that no TDS is deducted by the Bank is when your total income is not subject to tax and you submit Form 15G and Form 15H to the bank before the due date.Submit these forms at the beginning of each financial year to avoid the whole hassle of additional TDS deduction and subsequent refund from the IT Department.

Interest from FD for senior citizens:Senior citizens receiving interest income from FDs, savings accounts and recurring deposits can avail of income tax deductions of up to Rs 50,000 annually. This is by way of an amendment vide Finance Act 2018.If the senior citizen’s interest income from all FDs with a bank is less than Rs 50,000 in a year, the bank cannot deduct any TDS. 

Income tax on fixed deposit interest for a housewife:I am a homemaker. I have invested Rs. 5 lakhs in a bank FD in which I am getting interested after tax deduction(TDS). Do I need to file my tax return? Can I submit Form 15G to the bank if I have no other income? How to get back the refund of the tax deducted?
Banks and other financial institutions deduct tax at source(TDS) before paying you the interest income on FD.You will have to file an income tax return if your total income exceeds the basic exemption limit. If not, you will not be required to pay tax. If, however, tax is deducted from your income, you can claim a refund while filing your return.To receive interest without tax deduction, Form 15G and 15H can be submitted, but your income should be below the basic exemption limit of Rs 2.5 lakhs or Rs 3/5 lakhs, respectively, and the tax payable should be zero.Form 15G is to be submitted by people below the age of 60 years, and Form 15H by people of 60 years or more.
-If your age is 80 years or more: You can file Form 15H only if your taxable income is less than Rs 5 lakhs. 
-If your age is 60 years or more but less than 80 years: If you are a senior citizen, you can file Form 15H only if your taxable income is less than Rs 3lakhs. 
-If your age is less than 60 years: If you are not a senior citizen, you can file Form 15G only if your total income is not more than Rs 2.5 lakhs.


Dividend Income:As a taxpayer, you may be unsure about how to treat dividend income while filing your tax return. Do you need to pay tax on dividend income? Finance Act 2020 shifted the taxability on dividend income from the hands of the dividend declaring company to the individual investors.

Dividend Received From an Indian Company:After the abolition of the dividend distribution tax (DDT), the taxability of dividend income is now in the hands of the investors. 

Old V/s New provision for taxability of dividend income:
-The dividend received from an Indian company was exempt until 31 March 2020 (FY 2019-20). That was because the company declaring such a dividend already paid dividend distribution tax (DDT) before making payment.
-However, the Finance Act, 2020 changed the method of dividend taxation. Henceforth, all dividend received on or after 1 April 2020 is taxable in the hands of the investor/shareholder
-The DDT liability on companies and mutual funds stand withdrawn. Similarly, the tax of 10% on dividend receipts of resident individuals, HUF and firms in excess of Rs 10 lakh (Section 115BBDA) also stands withdrawn.

TDS on dividend income:
-The Finance Act, 2020 also imposes a TDS on dividend distribution by companies and mutual funds on or after 1 April 2020. 
-The normal rate of TDS is 10% on dividend income paid in excess of Rs 5,000 from a company or mutual fund. However, as a COVID-19 relief measure, the government reduced the TDS rate to 7.5% for distribution from 14 May 2020 until 31 March 2021.
-The tax deducted will be available as a credit from the total tax liability of the taxpayer while filing ITR. 
-For instance, Mr Ravi received a dividend amounting to Rs 6,000 from an Indian company on 15 June 2023. Since his dividend income exceeds Rs 5,000, the company will deduct a TDS @10% on the dividend income which is Rs 600. Mr Ravi will receive the balance amount of Rs 5,400. Further, the dividend income is the taxable income of Mr Ravi taxed at the slab rates applicable for FY 2023-24 (AY 2024-25).
-For non-resident persons, TDS is required to be deducted at the rate of 20% subject to the DTAA (double taxation avoidance agreement), if any. To avail of the benefit of lower deduction due to the beneficial treaty rate with the country of residence, the non-resident has to submit documentary proof such as Form 10F, declaration of beneficial ownership, certificate of tax residency etc. In the absence of submission of these documents, higher TDS would be deducted, which can be claimed at the time of filing ITR.

Deduction of expenses from dividend income:The Finance Act, 2020 also provides for deduction of interest expense incurred against the dividend.The deduction should not exceed 20% of the dividend income received. However, you are not entitled to claim a deduction for any other expenditure like commission or salary expense incurred for earning the dividend income.In the above example, if Mr. Ravi borrowed money to invest in equity shares and paid interest of Rs 2,700 during FY 2023-24, only Rs 1,200 is allowable as an interest deduction.

Submission of Form 15G/15H:A resident individual receiving dividends whose estimated annual income is below the exemption limit can submit form 15G to the company or mutual fund paying the dividend.Similarly, a senior citizen whose estimated annual tax payable is nil can submit Form 15H to the company paying the dividend.The company or mutual fund informs the shareholder about the dividend declaration on their registered mail id and requires submission of form 15G or form 15H to claim dividend income without TDS.

Advance Tax on Dividend Income:Advance tax provisions apply if the total tax liability of the taxpayer is equal to or more than Rs.10,000 in a particular financial year. Interest and penalty is levied in case of non-payment or short payment of the advance tax liability. 

Dividend Received From Foreign Company:Dividend received from a foreign company is taxable. It will be charged to tax under the head “income from other sources.” Dividends received from a foreign company will be included in the total income of the taxpayer and will be charged to tax at the rates applicable to the taxpayer.For instance, if the taxpayer comes in at the 30% tax slab rate, then such dividend will also be taxable at 30% along with cess.Even in the case of foreign dividend, the investor can claim deduction only for the interest expense restricted to 20% of the gross dividend income.However, the company declaring the dividend will have to deduct TDS under section 194 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. As per this section, 10% TDS is applicable for dividend income above Rs.5000 for an individual; this rate will be increased to 20% in the absence of PAN submission by the recipient of dividend income.

Relief from Double Taxation:Dividend received from a foreign company gets taxed both in India and in the home country of the foreign company.However, if the tax on an international company’s dividend has been paid twice (i.e. paid in both the nations), then the taxpayer can claim double taxation relief.The relief claimed can be either as per the provisions of double taxation avoidance agreement entered into by the Government of India, with the country to which the foreign company belongs, or he can claim relief as per Section 91 (in case no such agreement exists). This means that the taxpayer doesn’t have to pay tax on the same income twice.


Deemed Dividend under Section 2(22)(e):
The term ‘Dividend’, as generally understood, refers to the return(s) earned by a shareholder for investing in a company by buying its shares. Such dividend was tax-free for the recipient as companies paying dividends already pay Dividend Distribution Tax when they pay out the dividend.Interestingly, for the purpose of Indian tax laws, a dividend also included ‘Deemed Dividend’ in its ambit. This article throws light on the taxability of deemed dividend.Before navigating the intricacies of deemed dividends, let's clarify the fundamental concepts of dividends and their treated counterparts.
Dividends: A shareholder's reward for investing in a company, dividends represent a portion of the company's profits distributed back to its owners. It's essentially a financial return on your investment.
Deemed Dividends: Not every financial benefit received by shareholders qualifies as a traditional dividend. The Income Tax Act outlines specific situations under Section 2(22)(e) where certain transactions are deemed equivalent to dividends for tax purposes, even if no formal dividend distribution occurs.
Latest Update:In Budget 2020, the Finance Minister has abolished Dividend Distribution Tax (DDT). Now the incidence of dividend income taxation is shifted to investors from the companies.

Deemed Dividend under Section 2(22)(e):According to Section 2(22)(e), when a company in which the public are not substantially interested*, extends a loan or an advance to:
a.any of its shareholders who has more than 10% voting power in the company or 
b.to any concern in which such shareholder is substantially interested or 
c.for the individual benefit of such shareholder or 
d.on behalf of such shareholder to the extent the company has accumulated profits, such payment would be deemed as a dividend under Section 2(22)
*a company in which public is not substantially interested is otherwise called a closely held company.

Exceptions:Payment under circumstances specified below will not be treated as a deemed dividend: 
a.Loan given by a company involved in money lending, where loans have been extended in the ordinary course of business 
b.Loan extended to shareholders, subsequently adjusted against dividend declared and distributed later

Illustration:Here is a simple illustration to explain the provisions of deemed dividends.ABC Pvt Ltd. is a company, the public is not substantially interested in. Hari is one of the company shareholders, who hold 15% shares. The company has accumulated profits of Rs.25 lakhs as on 31 March 2018. The company granted a loan of Rs.100,000 to Hari, by way of an account payee cheque. He repaid the amount on 5 May 2018.In this case, even if the loan has been repaid by Hari, the loan amount granted to the extent of accumulated profits are treated as deemed dividend.

Income tax implications:Earlier (prior to 1st April 2018), companies that pay out deemed dividends would not pay DDT on such payments. 
Budget 2018 introduced an amendment to Section 115-O that addresses this. It mandated such companies to pay DDT at the rate of 30% plus applicable surcharge and cess on transactions carried out on or after 1 April 2018. 
This amendment has been introduced because the taxability of deemed dividend in the hands of recipient made tax collection on it from the shareholder difficult. As a result, the shareholder doesn’t have to pay any taxes on such receipts. In Budget 2021, the burden of paying tax on dividend is transferred to the shareholders. Now the companies are not liable to pay Dividend Distribution Tax (DDT) while distributing dividends to the shareholders, i.e. DDT is abolished. 
These amendment has put all this to rest.Here are some key scenarios classified as deemed dividends under Section 2(22)(e):
-Release of Company Assets: When a closely-held company distributes its accumulated profits or assets directly to shareholders, it triggers deemed dividend taxation.
-Debentures, Deposit Certificates, and Bonus Shares: If a closely-held company issues debentures, deposit certificates, or bonus shares to preference shareholders from its accumulated profits, it falls under the deemed dividend category.
-Liquidation: When a closely-held company liquidates and distributes its accumulated profits amongst shareholders, it's treated as deemed dividend income for tax purposes.
-Capital Reduction Distribution: Any distribution of accumulated profits to shareholders during a capital reduction in a closely-held company also qualifies as deemed dividend.
-Loans or Advances from Accumulated Profits: If a closely-held company provides loans or advances to its shareholders using accumulated profits, this benefit is similarly treated as deemed dividend income.
Taxability of Dividends: Understanding how dividends are taxed for both companies and shareholders, post-April 1, 2020, is crucial.

For Companies:
-Dividend Distribution Tax (DDT) has been abolished.
-Companies now deduct Tax Deducted at Source (TDS) on dividends at a rate of 10%.
-No TDS is required if the dividend paid to a shareholder per financial year doesn't exceed Rs. 5,000.

For Resident Shareholders:
-Depending on how you hold the shares (trader/investor), dividend income falls under either business/profession income or income from other sources, influencing applicable tax rates.
-A special concessional rate of 10% applies to dividends received by resident individuals working in specific industries if earned through Global Depository Receipts (GDRs) purchased in foreign currency.

For Non-Resident Shareholders:
-Dividend income, including for Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs) and Non-Resident Indian (NRI) citizens, is taxed at a flat rate of 20%.
-An exception exists for the investment division of an offshore banking unit, enjoying a reduced tax rate of 10%.
-GDR dividends of Indian companies or PSUs bought in foreign currency are also taxed at 10% without deductions.


Income Tax On Lottery Winnings And Game Show Winnings In India:We all are aware of the most famous game show ‘Kaun Banega Crorepati’ and numerous reality shows like Indian Idol and Dance India Dance. These shows offer huge chunks of prizes in cash as well as kind i.e. in the form of cars or houses etc. This form of income earned is taxable, and TDS is deducted before giving away lottery, game shows, or talent shows income.Income from lottery winnings and online games are included under the head ‘Other source of Income’ and is taxable at the special rate of 30% without providing the benefit of basic exemption and deduction like 80C, 80D  etc.
Latest Update:As per Finance Act 2023, section 194BA was introduced for any winning from online games on net winnings. TDS @ 30% will be deducted from such winnings. Rule 133 was introduced, providing clarity in the computation of net winnings in online games.

TDS Applicability On Lottery Or Game Show Income:
-If the Prize money exceeds Rs 10,000, then the winner will receive the prize money after the deduction of TDS @31.2% u/s 194B.
-In the case of winnings from horse races, TDS will be applicable if the amount exceeds Rs 10,000.
-No deduction/expenditure is allowed from such income.
-No deduction under section 80C or 80D or any other deduction/allowance is allowed from such income.
-The benefit of the basic exemption limit and income tax slab rate is also not applicable to this income. The entire amount received will be taxable at the flat rate of 31.20%.
-For instance, if Rahul has won Rs 3 lakhs as prize money from a game show and has an interest income of Rs 5 lakhs p.a., then the tax liability would be calculated as follows: Tax on Rs 3 lakhs @ 31.2% Tax on Rs 5 lakhs as per income tax slab rates after claiming the relevant deductions.

Tax On Prize Money Received In Kind:
-If the prizes are given in kind, say a car, the prize distributor shall ensure before releasing the prize that tax has been paid. Tax is paid according to the market value of the prize given. The prize distributor can either recover from the winner or he himself can bear the burden of the tax.
-For instance, if Suman wins an Alto car in a contest whose market value is Rs 4 lakhs, then tax @ 31.2% which is Rs 1,24,800 must be paid before the car is given to the winner.
-In cases where the prize is given both in cash and in kind,  the total tax should be calculated on the cash portion of the prize and on the market value of the prize given in kind. And the tax amount should be deducted while giving the cash portion of the prize to the winner. But if the cash prize is not sufficient to cover the total tax liability, then either the winner or prize distributor should pay the deficit.

Tax On Winnings From Online Games:In the Finance Act 2023, a new provision of Section 115BBJ and 194BA was introduced for tax withholding on net winnings from online games. This is because of rapid growth in the online gaming industry. Online games like Dream11, Paytm First Games, Gameskraft etc have seen a rapid boom, attracting a lot of users in a short period of time. Currently, the lower threshold for applicability of TDS is Rs 100. Thus if the net winnings are greater than Rs 100, such platforms are liable to deduct TDS under section 194BA.As per Rule 133, net winning is computed in the following manner, and TDS @ 30% is computed only on such net winnings from online games.
Amount withdrawn from user account in a year+Closing balance in user account at the end of the year-Non Taxable deposit made during the year-Opening balance in the user account = Net Withdrawal.

Joining and Referral Bonus:Joining and referral bonuses paid to the user are not subject to tax under section 115BBJ. However, it is considered as taxable deposit and is included in the net winning based on the above formulae. Now person responsible for paying the net winning is liable to deduct TDS under section 194BA @ 30%.

















































































































































 
