Income from House property-

SECTION 22:CHARGEABILITY:
(i)The process of computation of income under the head “Income from house property” starts with the determination of annual value of the property. The concept of annual value and the method of determination is laid down in section 23.
(ii)The annual value of any property comprising of buildings or lands appurtenant thereto of which the assessee is the owner is chargeable to tax under the head “Income from house property”.

Exceptions: Annual value of the following properties are chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”-
(i)Portions of property occupied by the assessee for the purpose of any business or profession carried on by him.
(ii)Properties of an assessee engaged in the business of letting out of properties.

Note:Annual value is the amount for which the property might reasonably be expected to let from year to year.


CONDITIONS FOR CHARGEABILITY:
(i)Property should consist of any building or land appurtenant thereto:
(a)Buildings include not only residential buildings, but also factory buildings, offices, shops, god owns and other commercial premises.
(b)Land appurtenant means land connected with the building like garden, garage etc.
Note:Income from letting out of vacant land is, however, taxable under the head “Income from other sources” or “Profits and gains from business or profession”, as the case may be.

(ii)Assessee must be the owner of the property:
(a)Owner is the person who is entitled to receive income from the property in his own right.
(b)The requirement of registration of the sale deed is not warranted.
(c)Ownership includes both free-hold and lease-hold rights.
(d)Ownership includes deemed ownership 
(e)The person who owns the building need not also be the owner of the land upon which it stands.
(f)The assessee must be the owner of the house property during the previous year. It is not material whether he is the owner in the assessment year.
(g)If the title of the ownership of the property is under dispute in a court of law, the decision as to who will be the owner chargeable to income- tax under section 22 will be of the Income-tax Department till the court gives its decision to the suit filed in respect of such property
Note:In case of recovery of unrealized rent and arrears of rent, ownership of that property is not relevant. 

(iii)Use of property: The property may be used for any purpose i.e., commercial or residential purpose, but it should not be used by the owner for the purpose of any business or profession carried on by him, the profit of which is chargeable to tax.
The income earned by an assessee engaged in the business of letting out of properties on rent would be taxable as business income.[Supreme Court ruling in Rayala Corporation (P) Ltd. v. Asstt. CIT (2016) 386 ITR 500}
(iv)Property held as stock-in-trade etc: Annual value of house property will be charged under the head “Income from house property”, where it is held by the assessee as stock-in-trade of a business also. However, the annual value of property being held as stock in trade would be treated as NIL for a period of Two years from the end of the financial year in which certificate of completion of construction of the property is obtained from the competent authority, if such property is not let-out during such period [Section 23(5)]
Note:Where the assessee is a builder/construction company, the house property would be its stock-in-trade and rental income therefrom would  be  assessable  under  the  head  “Income  from  House Property”. However, where the assessee is engaged in the business of letting out of properties, income therefrom would be assessable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.


COMPOSITE RENT:
(i)Meaning of composite rent: The owner of a property may sometimes receive rent in respect of building as well as –
(1)other assets like say, furniture, plant and machinery.
(2)for different services provided in the building, for e.g., –
(a)Lifts;
(b)Security;
(c)Power backup;
The amount so received is known as “composite rent”
(ii)Tax treatment of composite rent: Where composite rent includes rent of building and charges for different services (lifts, security etc.), the composite rent is has to be split up in the following manner-
(a)the sum attributable to use of property is to be assessed under section 22 as income from house property;
(b)the sum attributable to use of services is to be charged to tax under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” or under the head “Income from other sources”, as the case may be.
(iii)Manner of splitting up:If let out building and other assets are inseparable: Where composite rent is received from letting out of building and other assets (like furniture) and the two lettings are not separable i.e. the other party does not accept letting out of building without other assets, then the rent is taxable either as business income or income from other sources, the case may be.
This is applicable even if sum receivable for the two lettings is fixed separately.
If let out building and other assets are separable
Where composite rent is received from letting out of building and other assets and the two lettings are separable i.e. letting out of one is acceptable to the other party without letting out of the other, then
(a)income from letting out of building is taxable under “Income from house property”;
(b)Income from letting out of other assets is taxable under “Profits and gains of business or profession” or “Income from other sources”, as the case may be.
This is applicable even if a composite rent is received by the assessee from his tenant for the two lettings.


INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY SITUATED OUTSIDE INDIA:
(i)In case of a resident in India (resident and ordinarily resident in case of individuals and HUF), income from house property situated outside India is taxable, whether such income is brought into India or not.
(ii)In case of a non-resident or resident but not ordinarily resident in India, income from a property situated outside India is taxable only if it is received in India.


SECTION 23:DETERMINATION OF ANNUAL VALUE - [Determination of Gross Annual Value(GAV)-Municipal tax paid by the owner during the previous year = Net Annual Value (NAV)]
(i)Determination of annual value for different types of house properties:
(1)Where the property is let out throughout the previous year [Section 23(1)(a)/(b)]
Where the property is let out for the whole year, then the GAV would be the higher of –
(a)Expected Rent (ER) and
(b)Actual rent received or receivable during the year.

Note:-The Expected Rent (ER) is the higher of fair rent (FR) and municipal value (MV), but restricted to standard rent (SR).
-For example, let us say the higher of FR and MV is X. Then ER = SR, if X>SR. However, if X<SR, ER = X.
-Expected Rent (ER) as per section 23(1)(a) cannot exceed standard rent (SR) but it can be lower than standard rent, in a case where standard rent is more than the higher of MV and FR.
-Municipal value is the value determined by the municipal authorities for levying municipal taxes on house property.
-Fair rent means rent which similar property in the same locality would fetch.
-The standard rent (SR) is fixed by the Rent Control Act.

From the GAV computed above, municipal taxes paid by the owner during the previous year are to be deducted to arrive at the NAV.

Illustration:Jayashree owns five houses in India, all of which are let-out. Compute the GAV of each house from the information given below-
House I-
Municipal Value=80,000
Fair Rent=90,000
Standard Rent=Not available
Actual rent received/ receivable=72,000

As per section 23(1), Gross Annual Value (GAV) is the higher of Expected rent and actual rent received. Expected rent is higher of municipal value and fair rent but restricted to standard rent.
Computation of GAV -
(i)Municipal value = 80,000
(ii)Fair rent = 90,000
(iii)Higher of municipal value and Fair rent(Higher of(i) & (ii))
(iv)Standard Rent= Not available
(v)Expected rent[Lower of (iii) & (iv)]=90,000
(vi)Actual rent received/receivable =72,000
GAV[Higher of (v) & (vi)] = 90,000

House 2-
Municipal Value=55,000
Fair Rent=60,000
Standard Rent=75000
Actual rent received/ receivable=72,000

As per section 23(1), Gross Annual Value (GAV) is the higher of Expected rent and actual rent received. Expected rent is higher of municipal value and fair rent but restricted to standard rent.
Computation of GAV -
(i)Municipal value = 55,000
(ii)Fair rent = 60,000
(iii)Higher of municipal value and Fair rent(Higher of(i) & (ii))=60,000
(iv)Standard Rent= 75,000
(v)Expected rent[Lower of (iii) & (iv)]=60,000
(vi)Actual rent received/receivable =72,000
GAV[Higher of (v) & (vi)] = 72,000

House 3-
Municipal Value=65,000
Fair Rent=65,000
Standard Rent=58000
Actual rent received/ receivable=60,000

As per section 23(1), Gross Annual Value (GAV) is the higher of Expected rent and actual rent received. Expected rent is higher of municipal value and fair rent but restricted to standard rent.
Computation of GAV -
(i)Municipal value = 65,000
(ii)Fair rent = 65,000
(iii)Higher of municipal value and Fair rent(Higher of(i) & (ii))=65,000
(iv)Standard Rent= 58,000
(v)Expected rent[Lower of (iii) & (iv)]=58,000
(vi)Actual rent received/receivable =60,000
GAV[Higher of (v) & (vi)] = 60,000

House 4-
Municipal Value=80,000
Fair Rent=75,000
Standard Rent=78000
Actual rent received/ receivable=72,000

As per section 23(1), Gross Annual Value (GAV) is the higher of Expected rent and actual rent received. Expected rent is higher of municipal value and fair rent but restricted to standard rent.
Computation of GAV -
(i)Municipal value = 80,000
(ii)Fair rent = 75,000
(iii)Higher of municipal value and Fair rent(Higher of(i) & (ii))=80,000
(iv)Standard Rent= 78,000
(v)Expected rent[Lower of (iii) & (iv)]=78,000
(vi)Actual rent received/receivable =72,000
GAV[Higher of (v) & (vi)] = 78,000

(2)Where let out property is vacant for	part of	the year [Section 23(1)(c)]:Where let out property is vacant for part of the year and owing to vacancy, the actual rent is lower than the ER, then the actual rent received or receivable will be the GAV of the property.

(3)In case of self-occupied property or	unoccupied property [Section 23(2)]:
(a)Where the property is self-occupied for own residence or unoccupied throughout the previous year, its Annual Value will be Nil, provided no other benefit is derived by the owner from such property.
Note:The expression “Unoccupied property” refers to a property which cannot be occupied by the owner by reason of his employment, business or profession at a different place and he resides at such other place in a building not belonging to him.
(b)The benefit of “Nil” Annual Value is available only for upto two self-occupied or unoccupied house properties i.e., for either one house property or two house properties.
(c)The benefit of “Nil” Annual Value in respect of upto TWO self-occupied house properties is available only to an individual/HUF.
(d)No deduction for municipal taxes is allowed in respect of such property/ properties as annual value means value determined after deduction of municipal taxes.
 
(4)Where a house property is let-out for part of the year and self- occupied for part of the year [Section 23(3)]:
(a)If a single unit of a property is self-occupied for part of the year and let-out for the remaining part of the year, then the ER for the whole year shall be taken into account for determining the GAV.
(b)The ER for the whole year shall be compared with the actual rent for the let out period and whichever is higher shall be adopted as the GAV.
(c)However, municipal tax for the whole year is allowed as deduction provided it is paid by the owner during the previous year.

(5)In case of deemed to be let out property [Section 23(4)]:
(a)Where the assessee owns more two properties for self- occupation, then the income from any TWO properties, at the option of the assessee, shall be computed under the self- occupied property category and their annual value will be nil.
(b)The other self-occupied/ unoccupied properties shall be treated as “deemed let out properties”.
(c)This option can be changed year after year in a manner beneficial to the assessee.
(d)In case of deemed let-out property, the ER shall be taken as the GAV.
(e)The question of considering actual rent received/ receivable does not arise. Consequently, no adjustment is necessary on account of property remaining vacant or unrealized rent.
(f)Municipal taxes actually paid by the owner during the previous year, in respect of the deemed let out properties, can be claimed as deduction.

(6)In case of a house property held as stock-in-trade [Section 23(5)]:
(a)In some cases, property consisting of any buildings or lands appurtenant thereto may be held as stock-in-trade, and the whole or any part of the property may not be let out during the whole or any part of the previous year.
(b)In such cases, the annual value of such property or part of the property shall be Nil.
(C)This benefit would be available for the period upto TWO years from the end of the financial year in which certificate of completion of construction of the property is obtained from the competent authority.

(7)In case of a house property, a portion let out and a portion self- occupied:
(a)Income from any portion or part of a property which is let out shall be computed separately under the “let out property” category and the other portion or part which is self-occupied shall be computed under the “self-occupied property” category.
(b)There is no need to treat the whole property as a single unit for computation of income from house property.
(c)Municipal valuation/fair rent/standard rent, if not given separately, shall be apportioned between the let-out portion and self-occupied portion either on plinth area or built-up floor space or on such other reasonable basis.
(d)Property taxes, if given on a consolidated basis, can be bifurcated as attributable to each portion or floor or on a reasonable basis.

Note:The following are the circumstances where notional income is charged to tax instead of real income:
•Where the assessee owns more than two house properties for the purpose of self-occupation, the annual value of any two of those properties, at the option of the assessee, will be nil and the other properties are deemed to be let-out and income has to be computed on a notional basis by taking the Expected Rent (ER) as the GAV.
•In the case of property let-out throughout the previous year, if the Expected Rent (ER) exceeds the actual rent received or receivable, then ER is taken as the GAV.
•In the case of let-out property which is vacant for part of the year, if the actual rent received or receivable for let out period is less than the Expected Rent (ER) for whole year not owing to vacancy, then ER for whole year is taken as the GAV.
•In case of a house property held as stock-in-trade by assessee (which is not let out), income has to be computed on a notional basis by taking the Expected Rent (ER) as the GAV after 2 years from the end of the financial year in which certificate of completion of construction of the property is
obtained from the competent authority.

(ii)Treatment of unrealised rent [Explanation below section 23(1)]:
(1)The Actual rent received/receivable should not include any amount of rent which is not capable of being realised.
(2)However, the conditions prescribed in Rule 4 should be satisfied. They are –
(a)the tenancy is bona fide;
(b)the defaulting tenant has vacated, or steps have been taken to compel him to vacate the property;
(c)the defaulting tenant is not in occupation of any other property of the assessee;
(d)the assessee has taken all reasonable steps to institute legal proceedings for the recovery of the unpaid rent or satisfies the Assessing Officer that legal proceedings would be useless.
(iii)Property taxes (Municipal taxes)
(1)Property taxes are allowable as deduction from the GAV subject to the following two conditions:
(a)It should be borne by the assessee (owner); and
(b)It should be actually paid during the previous year.
(2)If property taxes levied by a local authority for a particular previous year are not paid during that year, no deduction shall be allowed in the computation of income from house property for that year.
(3)However, if in any subsequent year, the arrears are paid, then, the amount so paid is allowed as deduction in computation of income from house property for that year.
(4)Thus, we find that irrespective of the previous year in which the liability  to  pay  such  taxes  arises  according  to  the  method  of accounting regularly employed by the owner, the deduction in respect of such taxes will be allowed only in the year of actual payment by the owner.
(5)In case of property situated outside India, taxes levied by local authority of the country in which the property is situated is deductible [CIT v. R. Venugopala Reddiar (1965) 58 ITR 439 (Mad).]
(6)In respect of self-occupied/unoccupied house property/properties for which “Nil” Annual Value benefit is claimed, deduction of municipal taxes paid is not allowable.

illustration:Rajesh, a British national, is a resident and ordinarily resident in India during the P.Y.2023-24. He owns a house in London, which he has let out at £ 10,000 p.m. The municipal taxes paid to the Municipal Corporation of London is £ 8,000 during the P.Y.2023-24. The value of one £ in Indian rupee to be taken at ` 95. Compute Rajesh’s Net Annual Value of the property for the A.Y. 2024-25.
Solution:For the P.Y.2023-24, Mr. Rajesh, a British national, is resident and ordinarily resident in India. Therefore, income received by him by way of rent of the house property located in London is to be included in the total income in India. Municipal taxes paid in London is be to allowed as deduction from the gross annual value.

Gross Annual Value (£10,000*12*95)=1,14,00,000
less:Municipal taxes paid (£8,000*95)=7,60,000
Net Annual Value (NAV)[Gross Annual Value-Municipal taxes paid]=1,06,40,000


SECTION 24:DEDUCTIONS	FROM	ANNUAL	VALUE:
(i)There are two deductions from annual value. They are –
(1)30% of NAV; and
(2)Interest on borrowed capital

Deductions provided under section 24 are exhaustive-
(1)30% of NAV is allowed as deduction under section 24(a):
(a)This is a flat deduction and is allowed irrespective of the actual expenditure incurred.
(b)The assessee will not be entitled to deduction of 30%, in the following cases, as the annual value itself is nil.
(i)In case of self-occupied properties or
(ii)In case of property held as stock-in-trade and the whole or any part of the property is not let out during the whole or any part of the previous year, upto 2 years from the end of the financial year in which certificate of completion of construction of the property is obtained from the competent authority.
(2)Interest on borrowed capital is allowed as deduction u/s 24(b):Interest payable on loans borrowed for the purpose of acquisition, construction, repairs, renewal or reconstruction can be claimed as deduction.Interest payable on a fresh loan taken to repay the original loan raised earlier for the aforesaid purposes is also admissible as a deduction.

Interest for pre-construction period:Pre-construction period is the period prior to the previous year in which property is acquired or construction is completed.
Interest payable on borrowed capital for the period prior to the previous year in which the property has been acquired or constructed (Pre-construction interest) as reduced by any part thereof allowed as deduction under any other provision of the Act, can be claimed as deduction over a period of 5 years in equal annual installments commencing from the year of acquisition or completion of construction.
Interest for the year in which construction is completed/ property is acquired:
Interest relating to the year of completion of construction/ acquisition of property can be fully claimed in that year irrespective of the date of completion/ acquisition.

(ii)Deduction in respect of self-occupied or unoccupied property where annual value is nil
(1)Under default tax regime under section 115BAC:
There would be no deduction on account of interest on loan under section 24(b) under default tax regime under section 115BAC in respect of the property referred to in section 23(2) i.e., self-occupied or unoccupied property.
(2)Under optional tax regime (normal provisions of the Act):
(i)In case assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), the assessee will be allowed a deduction on account of interest (including 1/5th of the accumulated interest of pre-construction period) as under –
-Where	the property is acquired or constructed with capital borrowed on or after 1.4.1999 and such acquisition or construction is completed within 5 years from the end of the financial year in which the capital was borrowed.=Amount of Deduction is Actual interest payable	in aggregate for one or two self-occupied properties, subject to maximum of 2,00,000, if certificate mentioned in (2) below is obtained.
-Where	the property is repaired, renewed or reconstructed with capital borrowed on or after 1.4.1999.=Amount of Deduction will be Actual interest payable in aggregate for one or two self-
occupied properties, subject to a maximum of Rs30,000.

(2)Certificate to be furnished: For the purpose of claiming deduction of 2,00,000 as per (b)(i) in the table given above, the assessee should furnish a certificate from the person to whom any interest is payable on the capital borrowed, specifying the amount of interest payable by the assessee for the purpose of such acquisition or construction of the property or conversion of the whole or any part of the capital borrowed which remains to be repaid as a new loan.
•The ceiling limit would not apply to let-out/deemed let-out property: The ceiling limit prescribed for self-occupied property as above in respect of interest on loan borrowed does not apply to a let out/ deemed let-out property irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.
•Interest allowable on accrual basis: Deduction under section 24(b) for interest is available on accrual basis. Therefore interest accrued but not paid during the year can also be claimed as deduction.
In case of let out/ deemed let out property, interest accrued is allowable as deduction without ceiling limit under both the tax regimes. However, in case of default tax regime u/s 115BAC, the resultant loss from house property cannot be set off against income under any other head, whereas, under the normal provisions of the Act, the resultant loss from house property can be set off against income from any other head to the extent of ` 2 lakhs.
•Unpaid purchase price would be considered as capital borrowed: Where a buyer enters into an arrangement with a seller to pay the sale price in installments along with interest due thereon, the seller becomes the lender in relation to the unpaid purchase price and the buyer becomes the borrower. In such a case, unpaid purchase price can be treated as capital borrowed for acquiring property and interest paid thereon can be allowed as deduction under section 24.
•Interest on unpaid interest is not deductible.


COMPUTATION OF “INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY” FOR DIFFERENT CATEGORIES OF PROPERTY:
(I)PROPERTY LET OUT THROUGHOUT THE PREVIOUS YEAR-
Computation of GAV
Step 1:Compute Expected Rent(ER = Higher of MV and FR, but restricted to SR)
Step 2:Compute Actual rent received/receivable,
        Actual rent received/receivable less unrealized rent as per Rule 4 [The income-tax returns, however, permit deduction of unrealized rent from gross annual value. If this view is taken, the unrealized rent should be deducted only after computing gross annual value.]
Step 3:Compare ER and Actual rent received/receivable
Step 4:GAV is the higher of ER and Actual rent received/ receivable=A
Less:Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the previous year)=B
Net Annual Value (NAV) = (A-B)(GAV-Municipal taxe)=C
Less:Deductions u/s 24:
(a)30% of NAV=D
(b)Interest  on  borrowed  capital  (actual without any ceiling limit)=E
Income from house property (C-D-E)





(II)LET OUT PROPERTY VACANT FOR PART OF THE YEAR-
Computation of GAV:
Step 1:Compute Expected Rent(Expected Rent = Higher of market value and FR, but restricted to SR)
Step 2:Compute Actual rent received/receivable,
Actual rent received/receivable for let out period less unrealized rent as per Rule 4 [The income-tax returns, however, permit deduction of unrealized rent from gross annual value. If this view is taken, the unrealized rent should be deducted only after computing gross annual value.]
Step 3:Compare ER and Actual rent received/receivable computed for the let-out period
Step 4:-If Actual rent is lower than ER owing to vacancy, then Actual rent is the GAV.
-If Actual rent is lower than ER due to other reasons, then ER is the GAV.
-However, in spite of vacancy, if the actual rent is higher than the ER, then Actual rent is the GAV.
Gross Annual Value (GAV)=A
Less:  Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the previous year)=B
Net Annual Value (NAV) = (A-B)=C
Less:	Deductions under section 24
(a)	30% of NAV=D
(b)	Interest on borrowed capital (actual without any ceiling limit)=E

Income from house property=C-D-E	


(III)SELF-OCCUPIED PROPERTIES OR UNOCCUPIED PROPERTIES:
Annual value under section 23(2)=0
Less:  Deduction under section 24 = E (Interest on borrowed capital [Allowable only in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]:
(i)Interest on loan taken for acquisition or construction of house on or after 1.4.99 and same was completed within 5 years from the end of the financial year in which capital was borrowed, interest paid or payable in toto for one or two self-occupied properties subject to a maximum of ` 2,00,000 (including apportioned pre- construction interest).
(ii)Interest on loan taken for repair, renovation or reconstruction on or after 1.4.99, interest paid or payable in toto for one or two self-occupied properties subject to a maximum of ` 30,000.)
Income from house property=-E
However, aggregate interest on borrowed capital allowable under (i) and (ii) cannot exceed Rs 2,00,000.



(IV)HOUSE PROPERTY LET-OUT FOR PART OF THE YEAR AND SELF- OCCUPIED FOR PART OF THE YEAR:
Computation of GAV
Step 1  Compute ER for the whole year(ER = Higher of MV and FR, but restricted to SR)
Step 2  Compute Actual rent received/receivable
Actual rent received/receivable for the period let out less unrealized rent as per Rule 4 [The income-tax returns, however, permit deduction of unrealized rent from gross annual value. If this view is taken, the unrealized rent should be deducted only after computing gross annual value.]
Step 3 Compare ER for the whole year with the actual rent received/receivable for the let out period.
Step 4 GAV is the higher of ER computed for the whole year and Actual rent received/receivable computed for the let-out period.
Gross Annual Value (GAV)=A
Less:Municipal taxes(paid by the owner during the previous year)=B
Net Annual Value(NAV)=(A-B)=C
Less:Deductions under section 24:
(a)30% of NAV=D
(b)(b)	Interest on borrowed capital (actual without any ceiling limit)=E
Income from house property =C-D-E


(V)DEEMED TO BE LET OUT PROPERTY:
Gross Annual Value (GAV)(ER is the GAV of house property,ER = Higher of MV and FR, but restricted to SR)=A
Less:Municipal taxes(paid by the owner during the previous year)=B
Net annual value(NAV)=A-B=C
Less:Deductions under section 24:
(a)30% of NAV=D
(b)Interest on borrowed capital (actual without any ceiling limit)=E
Income from house property =C-D-E.


SECTION 25:INADMISSIBLE DEDUCTIONS:
Interest chargeable under this Act which is payable outside India shall not be deducted if –
(a)tax has not been paid or deducted from such interest and
(b)in respect of which there is no person in India who may be treated as an agent.

SECTION 25A:PROVISION FOR ARREARS OF RENT AND UNREALIZED RENT RECEIVED SUBSEQUENTLY:(i)	As per section 25A(1), the amount of rent received in arrears from a tenant or the amount of unrealised rent realised subsequently from a tenant by an assessee shall be deemed to be income from house property in the financial year in which such rent is received or realised, and shall be included in the total income of the assessee under the head “Income from house property”, whether the assessee is the owner of the property or not in that financial year.
(ii)Section 25A(2) provides a deduction of 30% of arrears of rent or unrealised rent realised subsequently by the assessee.
(iii)Summary:Arrears of Rent / Unrealised Rent(Section 25A)
-Taxable in the year of receipt/realisation.
-Deduction@30% of rent received/realised.
-Taxable even if assessee is not the owner of the property in the financial year of receipt/realisation.


SECTION 26:TREATMENT OF	INCOME FROM CO- OWNED PROPERTY:
(i)Where property is owned by two or more persons, whose shares are definite and ascertainable, then the income from such property cannot be taxed as income of an AOP.
(ii)The share income of each such co-owner should be determined in accordance with sections 22 to 25 and included in his individual assessment.
(iii)Where the house property owned by co-owners is self occupied by each of the co-owners, the annual value of the property of each co-owner will be Nil and each co-owner shall be entitled to a deduction of ` 30,000 /
` 2,00,000, as the case may be, under section 24(b) on account of interest on borrowed capital if they exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
However, the aggregate deduction of interest to each co-owner in respect of interest payable on loan taken for co-owned house property and interest, if any, payable on loan taken for another self-occupied property owned by him cannot exceed ` 30,000/ ` 2,00,000, as the case may be.
(iv)Where the house property owned by co-owners is let out, the income from such property shall be computed as if the property is owned by one owner and thereafter the income so computed shall be apportioned amongst each co-owner as per their specific share.
(v)Summary:Co-owned property [Section 26]
-Self-occupied property=The annual value of the property of each co- owner will be Nil and each co-owner shall be entitled to a deduction of Rs 30,000/ Rs 2,00,000, as the case may be, on account of interest on borrowed capital if they exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
However, if the co-owner owns another self- occupied/unoccupied property, the aggregate interest from the co-owned property and the other  self-occupied  property  cannot  exceed
` 30,000/` 2,00,000, as the case may be. As mentioned earlier, no interest deduction in respect of self-occupied property would be allowable to the co-owners under the default tax regime.
-Let-out property=The income from such property shall be computed as if the property is owned by one owner and thereafter the income so computed shall be apportioned amongst each co-owner as per their specific share.


SECTION 27:DEEMED OWNERSHIP:
As per section 27, the following persons, though not legal owners of a property, are deemed to be the owners for the purposes of section 22 to 26.
(i)Transfer to a spouse [Section 27(i)] – In case of transfer of house property by an individual to his or her spouse otherwise than for adequate consideration, the transferor is deemed to be the owner of the transferred property.
Exception – In case of transfer to spouse in connection with an agreement to live apart, the transferor will not be deemed to be the owner. The transferee will be the owner of the house property.
(ii)Transfer to a minor child [Section 27(i)] – In case of transfer of house property by an individual to his or her minor child otherwise than for adequate consideration, the transferor would be deemed to be owner of the house property transferred.
Exception – In case of transfer to a minor married daughter, the transferor is not deemed to be the owner.
Note - Where cash is transferred to spouse/minor child and the transferee acquires property out of such cash, then, the transferor shall not be treated as deemed owner of the property. However, clubbing provisions will be attracted.
(iii)Holder of an impartible estate [Section 27(ii)] – The impartible estate is a property which is not legally divisible. The holder of an impartible estate shall be deemed to be the individual owner of all properties comprised in the estate.
After enactment of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, all the properties comprised in an impartible estate by custom is to be assessed in the status of a HUF. However, section 27(ii) will continue to be applicable in relation to impartible estates by grant or covenant.
(iv)Member of a co-operative society etc. [Section 27(iii)] – A member of a co-operative society, company or other association of persons to whom a building or part thereof is allotted or leased under a House Building Scheme of a society/company/association, shall be deemed to be owner of that building or part thereof allotted to him although the co-operative society/company/ association is the legal owner of that building.
(v)Person in possession of a property [Section 27(iiia)] – A person who is allowed to take or retain the possession of any building or part thereof in part performance of a contract of the nature referred to in section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act shall be the deemed owner of that house property. This would include cases where the –
(1)possession of property has been handed over to the buyer
(2)sale consideration has been paid or promised to be paid to the seller by the buyer
(3)sale deed has not been executed in favour of the buyer, although certain other documents like power of attorney/agreement to sell/will etc. have been executed.
In all the above cases, the buyer would be deemed to be the owner of the property although it is not registered in his name.
(vi)Person having right in a property for a period not less than 12 years [Section 27(iiib)] – A person who acquires any rights in or with respect to any building or part thereof, by virtue of any transaction as is referred to in section 269UA(f) i.e. transfer by way of lease for not less than 12 years, shall be deemed to be the owner of that building or part thereof.

Exception – In case the person acquiring any rights by way of lease from month to month or for a period not exceeding one year, such person will not be deemed to be the owner.



Further explanation and commentary-

Income from House Property and Taxes-Budget 2023 update: It is proposed that the cost of acquisition of a property should not include any home loan interest claimed as an income-tax deduction by the seller throughout the holding term for computing capital gains from the sale of a residential property.
Income tax on house property: On Owning a house one day – everybody dreams of this, saves towards this and hopes to achieve this one day. However, owning a house property is not without responsibilities. Paying house property taxes annually is one of them. If you want to learn how to save tax on home loan interest, this guide is for you. It also talks about how to report home ownership in your income tax return.

Basics of House Property Tax:A house property could be your home, an office, a shop, a building or some land attached to the building like a parking lot. The Income Tax Act does not differentiate between commercial and residential property. All types of properties are taxed under the head ‘income from house property’ in the income tax return. An owner for the purpose of income tax is its legal owner, someone who can exercise the rights of the owner in his own right and not on someone else’s behalf.
When a property is used for the purpose of business or profession or for carrying out freelancing work – it is taxed under the ‘income from business and profession’ head. Expenses on its repair and maintenance are allowed as business expenditure.
(a)Self-Occupied House Property:A self-occupied house property is used for one’s own residential purposes. This may be occupied by the taxpayer’s family – parents and/or spouse and children. A vacant house property is considered as self-occupied for the purpose of Income Tax.
Prior to FY 2019-20, if more than one self-occupied house property is owned by the taxpayer, only one is considered and treated as a self-occupied property and the remaining are assumed to be let out. The choice of which property to choose as self-occupied is up to the taxpayer.
For the FY 2019-20 and onwards, the benefit of considering the houses as self-occupied has been extended to 2 houses. Now, a homeowner can claim his 2 properties as self-occupied and remaining house as let out for Income tax purposes.
(b)Let Out House Property:A house property which is rented for the whole or a part of the year is considered a let out house property for income tax purposes.
(C)Inherited Property:An inherited property i.e. one bequeathed from parents, grandparents, etc. again, can either be a self-occupied one or a let-out one based on its usage as discussed above.


How to calculate Income From House Property:Here is how you compute your income from a house property:
Determine Gross Annual Value (GAV) of the property: The gross annual value of a self-occupied house is zero. The rent is collected for a house on rent for a let-out property.

b.Reduce Property Tax: Property tax, when paid, is allowed as a deduction from GAV of property.

Note: The property taxes which the owner pays during the previous year are to be deducted to arrive at NAV. 

c.Determine Net Annual Value(NAV) : Net Annual Value = Gross Annual Value – Property Tax

d.Reduce 30% of NAV towards standard deduction: 30% on NAV is allowed as a deduction from the NAV under Section 24 of the Income Tax Act. No other expenses such as painting and repairs can be claimed as tax relief beyond the 30% cap under this section.

e.Reduce home loan interest: Deduction under Section 24 is also available for interest paid during the year on housing loan availed.

f.Determine Income from house property: The resulting value is your income from house property. This is taxed at the slab rate applicable to you.

g.Loss from house property: When you own a self-occupied house, since its GAV is Nil, claiming the deduction on home loan interest will result in a loss from house property. This loss can be adjusted against income from other heads.
Note:
-The maximum loss that could be set off against other House Property is 2 Lakh in a year.
-If the loss exceeds 2 lakhs in a year, it can be carried forward for 8 years. However, in the subsequent years it could be only set off under the same head “Income Under Head House property".
-When a property is let out, its gross annual value is the rental value of the property. The rental value must be higher than or equal to the reasonable rent of the property determined by the municipality.



How to Calculate the Gross Annual Value of the let-out property?-GAV should be calculated for both let-out property and deemed let-out property. Where the property is let out for the whole year, then the GAV would be higher of:
1. Expected Rent (ER): The expected rent is the higher of the fair rent and municipal value but is restricted to standard rent. It cannot exceed standard rent but can be lower than standard rent, but it can be more than fair rent and Municipal value.
For example, if Manoj owns a house that is let out, Determine the GAV, Muncipal value-Rs.80,000, Fair Rent –Rs.90,000, Standard Rent-Rs.75,000, Actual Rent-Rs.72,000.
Solution: We will taker higher of Municipal value and Fair rent, which is 90,000. then we will take standard rent that is rs 75,000. expected rent will be lower of 90,000(higher of municpal value and fair rent) and standard rent. Thus, expected rent will be Rs 75,000. Actual rent received is Rs 72,000, we will take GAV that is higher of expected rent and actual rent recieved. therefor, gross annual value will be Rs 75,000.
Note: If the property is covered under the Rent Control Act, then the reasonable expected rent can not exceed the maximum recoverable rent from the tenant (also called Standard Rent).


2. Actual rent received or receivable during the year.

Actual rent means the rent for the property during the year, including rent during vacancy periods. If the conditions below are met, the unpaid rent will be subtracted from the actual rent. Unpaid/ Unrealised rent is rent the owner couldn't collect if:
-The rental agreement is real.
-The tenant who didn't pay has left, or efforts have been made to make them leave.
-The tenant doesn't have another property belonging to the owner.
-The owner tried to get the rent, even legally or can prove legal action won't work.

House property Income calculation:Let's consider a property with the following details- Gross annual value is Rs 5,00,000. Municipal taxes paid during the year is Rs 20,000 and interest on loan borrowed for the year is rs 1,00,000.
Answer: Net asset Value(NAV) is gross annual value less municipal taxes paid during the year i.e. GAV(5,00,000)-Municipal taxes paid during the year(20,000)=480,000. we will deduct deduction under section 24 that is Deduction under section 24(a) @ 30% of NAV(1,44,000) and Deduction under section 24(b) on interest(1,00,000). Then, Income from house property will be Rs 2,36,000.


Tax Deduction on Home Loans:
a.Tax Deduction on Home Loan Interest: Section 24
Homeowners can claim a deduction of up to Rs 2 lakh on their home loan interest if the owner or his family resides in the house property. The same treatment applies when the house is vacant. If you have rented out the property, the entire home loan interest is allowed as a deduction.


However, your deduction on interest is limited to Rs. 30,000 instead of Rs 2 lakhs if any of the following conditions are satisfied:
A.Condition I :The loan is taken on or after 1 April 1999, and The purchase or construction is not completed within 5 years from the end of the FY in which loan was availed.
B.Condition II:The loan is taken before 1 April 1999.
C.Condition III:The loan is taken on or after 1 April 1999 for the purpose of repairs or renewal of the house property.

When is the deduction limited to Rs 30,000?:As already mentioned, if the construction of the property is not completed within 5 years, the deduction on home loan interest shall be limited to Rs. 30,000. The period of 5 years is calculated from the end of the financial year in which loan was taken. So, if the loan was taken on 30th April 2015, the construction of the property should be completed by 31st March 2021. (For years prior to FY 2016-17, the period prescribed was 3 years which got increased to 5 years in Budget 2016). 
Note: Interest deduction can only be claimed, starting in the financial year in which the construction of the property is completed.

How do I claim a tax deduction on a loan taken before the construction of the property is complete?:Deduction on home loan interest cannot be claimed when the house is under construction. It can be claimed only after the construction is finished. The period from borrowing money until construction of the house is completed is called pre-construction period. Interest paid during this time can be claimed as a tax deduction in five equal instalments starting from the year in which the construction of the property is completed. 

b.Tax Deduction on Principal Repayment:The deduction to claim principal repayment is available for up to Rs. 1,50,000 within the overall limit of Section 80C. Check the principal repayment amount with your lender or look at your loan instalment details.
Conditions to claim this deduction-
-The home loan must be for purchase or construction of a new house property.
-The property must not be sold in five years from the time you took possession. Doing so will add back the deduction to your income again in the year you sell.
Stamp duty and registration charges:Stamp duty and registration charges and other expenses related directly to the transfer are also allowed as a deduction under Section 80C, subject to a maximum deduction amount of Rs 1.5 lakh. Claim these expenses in the same year you make the payment on them.

c.Tax Deduction for First-Time Homeowners: Section 80EE:Section 80EE recently added to the Income Tax Act provides the homeowners, with only one house property on the date of sanction of loan, a tax benefit of up to Rs 50,000.Section 80EE allows income tax benefits on the interest portion of the residential house property loan availed from any financial institution. As per this section, you can claim a deduction of up to Rs 50,000 per financial year. You can continue to claim this deduction until you have fully repaid the loan.
Taxpayers can claim 80EE only if they had serviced a home loan between 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017:It is suggested in Budget 2023 that when calculating capital gains from the sale of a residential property, the cost of acquisition should not include any home loan interest claimed as an income tax deduction by the seller throughout the holding term.

Features of the 80EE Deduction:
Eligibility criteria: The deduction under this section is available only to individuals. This means that you cannot claim the benefit under this section if you are a HUF, AOP, a company, or any other taxpayer.
Amount limit: The deduction is up to Rs 50,000. It is over and above the Rs 2 lakh limit under Section 24 of the Income Tax Act. 
Read more about the deduction of Rs 2 lakh on interest on a home loan here.
Other conditions: To claim this deduction, you should not own any other house property on the date of the sanction of a loan from a financial institution.
Note: This deduction can be claimed only if the taxpayer opts for the old tax regime.

Conditions to be Met for Claiming Deduction
-Value of the house should be Rs 50 lakh or less
-Loan taken for the house must be Rs 35 lakh or less
-The loan must be sanctioned by a financial institution or a housing finance company
-The loan must be sanctioned between 01.04.2016 to 31.03.2017
-As of the date of the sanction of the loan, no other house property must be owned by you.

Things to Remember=Section 80EE came into effect in the financial year 2013-14. It was available for only two years, FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15. The deduction allowed earlier was limited to a maximum of Rs 1 lakh in total and was available for only two financial years.However, this section has been reintroduced, effective from FY 2016-17 (AY 2017-18). Now the deduction is allowed for up to Rs 50,000 per year until the loan is repaid. The section does not specify if you need to be a resident to claim this benefit. Therefore it can be concluded that both resident and non-resident Indians can claim this deduction. The section also does not specify if this house should be self-occupied to claim the deduction. So, borrowers living in rented houses can also claim this deduction.Moreover, individuals can claim the deduction for house purchases jointly or singly. If a person jointly owns the house with a spouse and they both are paying the instalments of the loan, then both of them can claim this deduction.Under the new tax regime, the deduction allowed under Section 80EE is not allowed.

Section 80EE and Section 24:If you can satisfy the conditions of both Section 24 and Section 80EE of the Income Tax Act, be quick to claim the benefits. 
-First, exhaust your deductible limit under Section 24, Rs 2 lakh.
-Then go on to claim the additional benefits under Section 80EE.
Therefore, this deduction is in addition to the Rs 2 lakh limit allowed under Section 24.

Section 80EE and Section 80EEA:The Union Budget 2019 has introduced a new Section 80EEA to extend the tax benefits of the interest deduction up to Rs 1,50,000 for housing loans taken for affordable housing during the period 1 April 2019 to 31 March 2022. The individual taxpayer should be a first-home buyer and should not be entitled to a deduction under Section 80EE.
The difference between Section 80EE & section 80EEA can be understood. Under section Section 80EE will apply, if loan is sactioned between 01-04-2016 to 31-03-2017 and deduction allowed on interest paid is Rs 50,000 and the loan amount limit is Rs 35,00,000. the value of house is Rs 50,00,000 that is actual value.

Under section 80EEA, the loan is sanctioned between 01-04-2019 to 31-03-2022, the deduction allowed is Rs 1,50,000 and there is no limit on this. The value of house is Rs 45,00,000 as stamp duty value.Deduction is allowed only if the loan was borrowed during the said periods.


c. Tax Deduction for First-Time Homeowners: Section 80EEA
A new section 80EEA is added to extend the tax benefits of interest deduction for housing loan taken for affordable housing during the period 1 April 2019 to 31 March 2020. The individual taxpayer should not be entitled to deduction under section 80EE.These benefits are not available for an under construction property.

Do you own more than one house?If you own more than one house, you need to file the ITR-2 form.

Under the objective “Housing for all”, the governmSection 24ent extended the interest deduction allowed for low-cost housing loans taken during the period between 1 April 2019 and 31 March 2022.Accordingly, a new Section 80EEA has been inserted to allow for an interest deduction from AY 2020-21 (FY 2019-20). The older provision of Section 80EE allowed a deduction of up to Rs 50,000 for interest paid by first-time home-buyers for loans sanctioned from a financial institution between 1 April 2016 and 31 March 2017.With a view to further the benefit and giving impetus to the real estate sector, the government has extended the benefit for FY 2019-20. This deduction can be claimed until you have repaid the housing loan.
Latest update-Budget 2023 proposes that when calcu:lating capital gains from the sale of a residential property, the cost of acquisition should not include any home loan interest claimed as an income-tax deduction by the seller throughout the holding term.
Eligibility criteria-The deduction under this section is available only to individuals. This deduction is not available to any other taxpayer.  Thus, you cannot claim any benefit under this section if you are a HUF, AOP, partnership firm, company, or any other taxpayer. Moreover, the taxpayer needs to opt for the old tax regime to avail of deduction under this section.

Tax Benefits on Home Loan (FY 2023-24):
Section 24:Rs.2 lakh p.a. towards interest component of the housing loan repayment.
Section 80C:Rs 1.5 lakh p.a.  towards the principal component of the housing loan repayment.
Section 80EEA:Rs 1,50,000 p.a. towards interest component of the housing loan repayment.
Other conditions:Similar to Section 80EE, in order to claim a deduction under Section 80EEA, you should not own any other house property on the date of the sanction of a loan.

How is the Deduction Calculated Under Section 80EEA?:Let's look at two examples to calculate deductions under Section 80EEA:
Example 1:Mr Manohar took out a home loan in FY 2019-20 for a house with a stamp duty value of Rs 40 lakh, and he paid Rs 4,00,000 in interest for the year. He did not own any other residential property on the date the loan was issued. Is Mr Manohar qualified for a Section 80EEA deduction?
In this case, Mr Manohar can claim a Rs 200,000 deduction for home loan interest under Section 24. Furthermore, because the house's stamp value is less than Rs 45 lakh, he is eligible for a Rs 1,50,000 deduction under Section 80EEA. As a result, Mr Manohar is eligible for a total deduction of Rs 3,50,000 under Sections 80EEA and 24.

Example 2:Mr and Mrs Biswas purchased a house of Rs 45 lakh in FY 19-20, and Mr Biswas also took out a home loan with an annual interest payment of Rs 3,00,000. Mr and Mrs Biswas, can they both claim deductions under Section 80EEA?
Mrs Biswas is not a co-borrower in the loan. Hence only Mr Biswas can claim a deduction under Section 80EEA. Mr Biswas can claim a total deduction of Rs 3,00,000 (Rs 2,00,000 under Section 24 and Rs 1,00,000 under Section 80EEA).

Conditions for claiming the deduction:
-Taxpayer must choose the old tax regime while filing income tax return.
-Housing loan must be taken from a financial institution or a housing finance company for buying a residential house property.
-The loan should be sanctioned during the period 1st April 2019 and 31st March 2022.
-Stamp duty value of the house property should be Rs 45 lakh or less.
-The individual taxpayer should not be eligible to claim a deduction under the existing Section 80EE.
-The taxpayer should be a first-time home buyer. The taxpayer should not own any residential house property as of the date of sanction of the loan.

Conditions with respect to the carpet area of the house property. These conditions have been specified in the memorandum to the finance bill, but not mentioned in section 80EEA:
-The carpet area of the house property should not exceed 60 square meter (645 sq ft) in metropolitan cities of Bengaluru, Chennai, Delhi National Capital Region (limited to New Delhi,Noida, Greater Noida, Ghaziabad, Gurgaon, Faridabad), Hyderabad, Kolkata and Mumbai (whole of Mumbai Metropolitan Region)
-Carpet area should not exceed 90 square meter (968 sq ft) in any other cities or towns.
-Further, this definition will be effective for affordable real estate projects approved on or after 1 September 2019.

Section 80EEA has been introduced to further extend the benefits allowed under Section 80EE for low-cost housing. Earlier, Section 80EE had been amended occasionally to allow a deduction for interest paid on housing loans for FY 2013-14, FY 2014-15, and FY 2016-17.
The section does not specify if you need to be a resident to be able to claim this benefit. Therefore, it can be concluded that both Resident and Non-Resident Indians can claim this deduction.
The section also does not specify if the residential house should be self-occupied to claim the deduction. So, borrowers living in rented houses can also claim this deduction. Moreover, individuals can only claim the deduction for house purchases jointly or singly. If a person jointly owns the house with a spouse and they both are paying the instalments of the loan, then both of them can claim this deduction. However, they must meet all the conditions laid down.

Tax deductions for stamp duty and registration charges:Stamp duty and registration fees can also be claimed as tax deductions under Section 80C of the Income Tax Act, but they must be within the overall maximum of Rs 1.5 lakh applied to principal payments. This benefit is available whether or not you take out a home loan. Furthermore, this benefit is only available in the year in which the expenses are incurred.

Tax deductions on interest paid for properties under construction:The Income Tax Act allows for the deduction of both pre-construction and post-construction period interest. Interest on pre-construction loans is deductible in five equal annual instalments beginning with the year the residential property is acquired or completed. Hence, the total interest deduction allowed to a taxpayer under Section 24(b) is 1/5th of the interest pertaining to the pre-construction period (if any) plus interest pertaining to the post-construction period (if any) subject to a maximum limit of Rs.200,000.

Tax deduction on home loans under Section 24(b):Section 24(b) of the Income Tax Act allows you to deduct the interest paid on your house loan. A maximum tax deduction of Rs.2 lakh can be claimed from your gross income yearly for a self-occupied residence, provided the construction/acquisition of the house is completed within five years.If you are able to satisfy the conditions of both Section 24 and Section 80EEA of the Income Tax Act, you can claim the benefits under both sections.First, exhaust your deductible limit under Section 24, which is Rs 2 lakh. Then, go on to claim the additional benefits under Section 80EEA. Therefore, this deduction is in addition to the Rs 2 lakh limit allowed under Section 24.

Tax benefits on joint home loan:If you take out a home loan jointly, each borrower can claim a deduction for home loan interest up to Rs 2 lakh under Section 24(b) and a tax deduction for principal repayment up to Rs 1.5 lakh under Section 80C. When compared to a single-applicant home loan, this doubles the number of deductions possible. It is needed, however, that both applicants be co-owners of the property and serve the EMIs.

Tax benefits on second home loan:If you take out a second house loan to buy another property, you can enjoy the same tax benefits, but the total amount of deductions are subject to the relevant restrictions listed above. The government has introduced further incentives for investing in real estate in the 2019 Union Budget. Before, only one property could be considered self-occupied, and a second house was deemed to be let out, and therefore notional rent was computed and taxed as income. Nonetheless, a second home can now be deemed a self-occupied property.


Claiming Deduction on Home Loan:
-The amount of deduction you can claim depends on the ownership share you have on the property.
-The home loan must also be in your name. A co-borrower can claim these deductions too.
-The home loan deduction can only be claimed from the financial year in which the construction is completed.
-Submit your home loan interest certificate to your employer for him to adjust tax deductions at source accordingly. This document contains information on your ownership share, borrower details and EMI payments split into interest and principal.
-Otherwise, you may have to calculate the taxes on your own and claim the refund, if any, at the time of tax filing. It’s also possible that you may have to deposit the dues on your own if there is a tax payable.
-If you are self-employed or a freelancer, you don’t have to submit these documents anywhere, not even to the IT Department. You will need them to calculate your advance tax liability for every quarter. You must keep them safely to answer queries that may arise from the IT Department and for your own records.

Tax Benefits on Home Loans for Joint Owners:The joint owners, who are also co-borrowers of a self-occupied house property, can claim a deduction on interest on the home loan up to Rs 2 lakh each. And deduction on principal repayments, including a deduction for stamp duty and registration charges under Section 80C within the overall limit of Rs.1.5 lakh for each of the joint owners. These deductions are allowed to be claimed in the same ratio as that of the ownership share in the property.
You may have taken the loan jointly, but unless you are an owner in the property – you are not entitled to the tax benefits. There have been situations where the property is owned by a parent and the parent and child together take up a loan which is paid off only by the child. In such a case the child, who is not a co-owner is devoid of the tax benefits on the home loan.
Therefore, to claim the tax benefits on the property:
-You must be a co-owner in the property
-You must be a co-borrower for the loan
Each co-owner can claim a deduction of maximum Rs 1.5 lakh towards repayment of principal under section 80C. This is within the overall limit of Rs 1.5 lakh of Section 80C. Therefore, you can avail a larger tax benefit against the interest paid on home loan when the property is jointly owned and your interest outgo exceeds Rs 2 lakh per year.
It’s important to note that the tax benefit of both the deduction on home loan interest and principal repayment under section 80C can only be claimed once the construction of the property is complete.

HRA and Deduction on Home Loan:
Scenario 1: You live in a rented accommodation since your house is too small for your needs Raghav lives in a rented house in Noida since his own office, son’s school and his wife’s office are in Noida, He has his own house on the outskirts of Delhi which is quite small and also lying vacant. He is paying interest on the loan on his own house. Raghav can claim:
-HRA for rent he pays for the house in Noida,and
-Deduction on interest up to Rs 2,00,000 on the home loan

Scenario 2: You live in a rented house; your own house is also let out Neha recently bought a flat in Indore, though she lives and works in Bangalore. She has no plans of returning to Indore in the next five years so she gives that flat on rent. She lives on rent in Bangalore. Neha can claim:
-HRA for the rent she pays for the house in Bangalore and
-Claim the entire interest she pays during the year on the home loan

Exclusions to Income From House Property:The following house properties are excluded from the income computation:
-Farmhouses contributing to agricultural income
-Any palace in the occupation of an ex-ruler
-Property of a local authority
-Property of any registered trade union
-Property of a member of a Scheduled tribe;
-Statutory corporation or an institution or association financed by the Government for promoting the interests of the members either of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled tribes or both
-Any corporation established by the government to promote the interests of members of a minority group
-Any cooperative society formed for promoting the interests of the members either of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled tribes or both
-Property Income from the letting of warehouses for storage, processing or facilitating the marketing of commodities by an authority constituted under any law for the marketing of commodities
-Any institution for the development of ‘Khadi and Village Industries’
-Self-occupied house property of an individual which has not been rented throughout the previous year
-House property held for any charitable purposes
-Property of any political party

Deductions From House Property Income – Section 24:Buying a home is one of the most common long-term investment goals for most Indians. A great chunk of one’s income goes towards home loan EMI. So, the government has given plenty of tax benefits for house property under Section 24 of the Income Tax Act.The following income will be taxable under the head ‘Income from House Property’ of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
-Rental Income on a let-out property.
-Annual Value of a property which is ‘deemed’ to be let out for income tax purposes ( when you own more than two house property).
-The annual Value of a self-occupied property is Nil.

The annual Value of a self-occupied property is zero or can even be negative if home loan interest is paid. If the property is let out, its rent received is your Gross Annual Value. For a deemed to be let out property, a reasonable rent of a similar place is your Gross Annual Value.

Deductions Under House Property:
-Municipal tax – Municipal taxes are the annual amount paid to the municipal corporation of that area. Municipal taxes are to be deducted from the Gross Annual value to derive the Net annual value of the house property. Deduction of municipal tax is allowed only if it has been borne by the owner and paid during that financial year.
-Standard Deduction – Standard Deduction is 30% of the Net Annual Value calculated above. This 30% deduction is allowed even when your actual expenditure on the property is higher or lower. Therefore, this deduction is irrespective of the actual expenditure you may have incurred on insurance, repairs, electricity, water supply etc. For a self-occupied house property, since the Annual Value is Nil, the standard deduction is also zero on such a property.
-Deduction of Interest on Home Loan for the property –Homeowners can claim a deduction of up to Rs.2 lakh on their home loan interest if the owner or his family reside in the house property. The same treatment applies when the house is vacant. If you have rented out the property, the entire interest on the home loan is allowed as a deduction. Your deduction on interest is limited to Rs.30,000 if you fail to meet any of the conditions given below for the Rs.2 lakh rebate.-
-The home loan must be for the purchase and construction of a property;
-The loan must be taken on or after 1 April 1999;
-The purchase or construction must be completed within 5 years from the end of the financial year in which the loan was taken
Further, if you have availed the home loan during the period between 01-04-2016 to 31-03-2017, you can claim up to Rs.50,000 under Section 80EE over & above the above limit provided under Section 24.
Similarly, if you have borrowed a loan during the period between 01-04-2019 to 01-04-2022, you can claim upto Rs.1,50,000 under Section 80EEA over & above the above provided ceiling limit of Rs.2,00,000 
Note: Under the New tax regime, no deduction is allowed in respect of interest on loan borrowed for self-occupied property, whereas deduction is allowed with no ceiling limit for interest on loan borrowed for let-out property irrespective of the tax regime you choose.
Under old tax regime,  the deduction would be allowed as stated above for Self-occupied properties.

Who can claim deductions under Section 24?:Individuals owning a residential property that generates rental income or is self-occupied are eligible to claim deductions under Section. Types of deductions:
-Standard deduction: A flat 30% deduction is allowed on the gross annual value of the property, regardless of any actual expenses incurred. This makes it hassle-free and convenient.
-Interest on home loan: If you have availed a loan for the acquisition, construction, or repair of the property, you can claim the interest paid on the loan up to Rs. 2 lakhs per year.
Calculating the gross annual value:The gross annual value is the fair rental income the property could fetch if rented out in its current condition. It can be calculated as:
-Actual rent received: If the property is rented out, the actual rent received is considered the gross annual value.
-Municipal valuation: If the property is self-occupied, the municipal valuation can be used as a proxy for the gross annual value.

Pre Construction Interest:When you have taken a loan for the purchase or construction of a house property, you can claim a deduction on pre-construction interest. However, this is not allowed in the case of a loan for repairs or reconstruction.The total amount of pre-construction interest and interest on a housing loan that can be claimed in a year should not exceed Rs 2 lakh in any case. The deduction for this interest is allowed in 5 equal instalments starting from the year in which the house is purchased or the construction is completed. For example, if the construction of your property completed in FY 2022-23, on 25 June 2022, you can claim 1/5th of interest paid up till 31 March 2022 when you file your return from FY 2023-24 till FY 2027-28.

Conditions for Claiming Interest on Home Loan:You need to meet all the below 3 conditions to claim this deduction-
-The loan has been taken after 1st April 1999 for purchase or construction
-The acquisition or construction is completed within 5 years from the end of the financial year in which the loan was taken
-There is an interest certificate available for the interest payable on the loan. Note that your interest deduction may be limited to Rs 30,000 if any one of these conditions is met –
a)The loan is borrowed before 1st April 1999 for purchase, construction, repairs or reconstruction of house property
b)The loan is borrowed on or after 1st April 1999 for purchase, construction, repairs or reconstruction of house property.

Computation of Income Under House Property:Say, a person repays a housing loan of Rs 4 lakh annually out of which Rs 2 lakh is the interest component. He has also incurred a pre-construction interest of Rs 3 lakh. He is earning Rs 7000 monthly from a let-out property and also pays municipal taxes of Rs 3000 for the house. Let’s calculate his Income from house property in both the scenarios: (1) He has a self-occupied property, or (2) The property is rented out:
-In case of Self occupied:
Gross annual value (Rent paid -7000*12):0
less:Municipal taxes:0
Net annual Value:0
Less:standard deduction(30% of NAV):0
Less:Interest on Housing Loan:2,00,000
Less:Pre-construction interest (1/5th of 3 Lakhs):60,000
Income from House property:(2,60,000)
Overall loss restricted to:(2,00,000)

-In case of Let out:
Gross annual value (Rent paid -7000*12):84,000
less:Municipal taxes:3,000
Net annual Value:81,000
Less:standard deduction(30% of NAV):24,300
Less:Interest on Housing Loan:2,00,000
Less:Pre-construction interest (1/5th of 3 Lakhs):60,000
Income from House property:(2,03,300)
Overall loss restricted to:(2,00,000)

Remember, the maximum loss set-off allowed in a financial year is limited to Rs 2 lakh. The remaining loss can be carried forward to future years – 8 years in total. However, in these 8 years, it can only be set off from income from house property.

Example of claiming deductions under the following scenario:
Mr. X has 3 house property, 2 are self-occupied, 1 of them is offered for rent. Interest paid on a home loan of both the self-occupied properties is Rs 3.00 lakhs and interest paid on let out property is Rs. 2.5 lakhs. What all deductions can be claimed by him under house property income?
Self-occupied properties:
-After the amendment in Budget 2019, Mr. X can claim two property as self-occupied properties with annual value as Nil. Previous to 2019, only one property was claimed as self-occupied, the notional rent of the 2nd property was taxable.
-Mr. X can claim a maximum of Rs. 2 lakh of the aggregate deduction (for both the self-occupied properties) against actual home loan interest paid of Rs 3 lakh.
-As the annual value of self-occupied properties is considered nil, house property income will become negative after claiming home loan interest. This negative amount can be set off against other income of the current year. Also, the loss amount can be carried forward for the next 8 AYs which can be set off against future house property income only.
 
Rented property:
-In the case of rented property, actual rent received or receivable will be considered as a ‘ Gross annual value’.
-Deductions like municipal taxes paid, actual interest on housing loan (no ceiling limit for claiming interest on let out property) will be allowed as deduction. Here, Mr. X can claim actual home loan interest paid of Rs. 2.5 lakh as a deduction for the let out property.
-Mr. X can also claim a deduction of up to Rs. 1.5 lakh for principal repayment under section 80C which will be the aggregate of all home loan repayments.


Tax Benefits on Home Loan for Joint Owners:Tax benefits on a joint home loan can be availed by all the joint owners, provided certain conditions are met. Let’s take a look. Tax benefits on a joint home loan are available to all the joint owners. It’s pertinent to note that ‘ownership’ of the property is a prerequisite to availing any tax benefits against the property. You may have taken the loan jointly, but unless you are an owner of the property – you may not be entitled to the tax benefits.There have been situations where the property is owned by a parent, and the parent & child together take up a loan which is paid off only by the child. In such a case, the child, who is not a co-owner, is devoid of the tax benefits on the home loan. 

Conditions to Claim the Tax Benefit on the Property:
-You must be a co-owner of the property– To be able to claim tax benefits for a home loan, you must be an owner of the property. Many a time, a loan is taken jointly, but the borrower is not an owner as per the property documents. In such a case, you may not be able to claim tax benefits.
-You must be a co-borrower for the loan –Besides being an owner, you must also be an applicant as per the loan documents. Owners who are not borrowers and do not contribute to the EMI shall be devoid of the tax benefits.
-The construction of the property must be complete – Tax benefits on a house property can only be claimed, starting the financial year in which construction of the property is complete. Tax benefits are not available for an under-construction property. However, any Interest prior to completion is claimed in five equal instalments starting the year in which construction is complete.

What are the Tax Benefits?:
-For a self-occupied property – Each co-owner, who is also a co-applicant in the loan, can claim a maximum deduction of Rs 2,00,000 for interest on the home loan in their Income Tax Return. The total interest paid on the loan is allocated to the owners in the ratio of their ownership. Goes without saying, that the total interest claimed by the owners/borrowers cannot exceed the total interest paid for the loan. 
For example, Let’s understand Rahul and his father bought a house on loan and paid Rs 4,50,000 in interest. They have a 50:50 share in the property. Rahul can claim Rs 2,00,000 in his tax return, his father can also claim Rs 2,00,000.
-For a rented property – In the 2017 budget, there is no limit on interest that can be claimed as a deduction in case of rented property, However for set off of losses against other heads of income, is restricted to Rs. 2 lakhs.
For example, if the rental income is Rs. 600,000, Interest on the housing loan is Rs 12,00,000, and Salary income is Rs 15,00,000. Total Income will be as follows:
Income from Salary:15,00,000
Income from House Property:
Rental Income:6,00,000
Less: Standard deduction u/s 24(a):(180,000)
Less : Interest on loan u/s 24(b):(12,00,000)
Total:(7,80,000)
Income from House Property:(200,000)
Loss from House Property c/f to next year:(5,80,000)
Total Income:13,00,000

Thus in the above example, you will observe that excess loss over Rs 200,000 will be carried forward to next year, and such loss in next year will be eligible to set off only against income from house property
-Each co-owner can claim a deduction of a maximum of Rs 1,50,000 towards the repayment of principal under section 80C. This is within the overall limit of Rs 1,50,000 of Section 80C.
Therefore, as a family, you will be able to take a larger tax benefit against the interest paid on the home loan when the property is jointly owned and your interest outgo is more than Rs 2,00,000 per annum. 
There may be a situation where you are paying the entire loan instalment, and the co-borrower is not contributing any payments. In such a case, you may claim the entire interest as a deduction in your Income Tax Return. 

Things to Know About Tax Benefits on Home Loans for Joint Owners:
-The tax deduction fraction is determined by the loan’s ownership proportion.
-Each joint owner of the home loan can claim the maximum tax refund, i.e. Rs. 2,00,000, for interest on the home loan.
-The loan must be taken in the names of two people to claim tax benefits as joint owners on the home loan.
-Each individual’s share of the joint loan ownership should be written in percentages for the co-owners.

Deemed Ownership:Section 27 of the Income-tax Act explains the scenario of Deemed ownership. When an Individual transfer his property for other than adequate consideration-
-to his or her Spouse.
-to a minor child (not being a married daughter).
The person transferring such property will be deemed to be the full owner of the property as per the Act.Example: Husband (who is a salaried individual) buys house property in Joint name with his wife (who is a Homemaker). The husband is the sole earner, and he pays the entire consideration for such acquisition. Now he lets out such property for rent. Now the question is, since the wife is also 50% owner of the property, can 50% of such rental income be shown in the wife's income tax return? Since the wife has no taxable income, this helps in paying no taxes on such 50% rental income. In such cases, income tax deems that the entire property belongs to the husband and rental income needs to be declared in his ITR only since the entire consideration for such purchase of the property was paid by the husband.


Can there Be a Change in the Ratio of Tax Benefits on Home Loans for Joint Owners?:Both individuals need to be co-owners of the property to avail of tax benefits. The joint owners can claim a tax rebate on their proportion of shares. It means that a joint owner can consider his/her spouse’s repayment capacity when planning the share of a home loan. Thus, even if joint owners are equal, but their loan share is 60:40, the tax benefits will also be shared in the same ratio. If this ratio is changed to 70:30, even tax benefits will change accordingly. 
Stamp duty and registration charges of a property can also be claimed by the joint owners. 


Deduction for Pre-Construction Interest - House Property Income:House property income allows some deductions from the total taxable income like standard deduction, the deduction for municipal taxes paid, deduction on home loan interest paid, and ‘Pre-construction interest’ paid. Such deductions allow a taxpayer to reduce the tax outflow from their taxable income.
Let us learn more about ‘pre-construction interest’ under section 24(b) and how can we claim it.

Latest update:Deduction under section 24(b) for pre-construction interest cannot be claimed as a deduction if you are opting for a new tax regime in the case of self-occupied property.

What is Pre-Construction Interest?:Pre-construction interest is the interest that an assessee pays while the residential house is under construction.Deduction on home loan interest cannot be claimed when the house is under construction. This pre-construction interest can be claimed only after the construction is finished.

Example To Understand How To Claim Pre-Construction Interest:
-Prakash took a loan of Rs.20 lakhs to start construction of his house property in Bhubaneshwar in July 2021. He has been paying EMI of Rs.30,000 ever since.
-The construction was completed in August 2023, and he received a completion certificate.
-This house has been on rent since September 2023. Prakash is not sure how he can claim a deduction on interest for the home loan in his income tax return.
-Homeowners can claim the deduction on interest for the home loan only from the year in which the construction of the property is completed. In this case, Prakash can claim it from FY 2023-24.
-Prakash pays a total EMI of Rs. 6,30,000 in total from July 2021 till 31 March 2024. For the FY 2021-22, total EMI payments are Rs.30,000×9= 2,70,000, of which Rs 1,80,000 is paid towards principal repayment and Rs 90,000 is paid towards interest.
-For the FY 2022-23, Rs 2,40,000 goes towards principal repayment, and Rs 1,20,000 is paid towards interest.
-For FY 2023-24, Rs 1,68,000 is paid towards principal repayment, and Rs 72,000 is paid towards interest.

Let’s start with his EMI payments for FY 2023-24:
The total interest on a home loan is Rs 72,000 for FY 2023-24. Since the property is rented out, he can claim the entire interest as a deduction. Also, Prakash can claim a deduction for principal repayment of Rs 1,50,000 (Rs 1,68,000 or Rs 1,50,000, whichever is less) under Section 80C from FY 2023-24. Now let’s look at the interest paid when the house was under construction:
-The period from borrowing money until 31 March immediately preceding the year of completion of construction of the house is called the pre-construction period.
-The pre-construction interest deduction is allowed for interest payments made from the date of borrowing till March 31st before the financial year in which the construction is completed.
-Total interest on home loan: Rs 90,000 for FY 2021-22 and Rs 1,20,000 for FY 2022-23, sums up to Rs 2,10,000. 
-Rs 2,10,000 is the pre-construction interest that can be claimed in five equal installments of Rs.42,000 starting from FY 2023-24.
So Prakash can claim Rs.72,000 (interest of FY 2023-24) + Rs.42,000 = Rs.1,14,000 as a deduction towards the interest from the home loan in FY 2023-24.All said and done, one needs to bear in mind that :
-Maximum deduction on interest on housing loan for self-occupied house property is limited to Rs 200,000.
-In the case of let-out property, there is no such threshold limit however, loss from house property that can be set off against other heads of income has been restricted to Rs 2,00,000.
-Pre-construction interest deduction is included in the above threshold limit of Rs. 200,000 (Self-occupied). Thus if your current year interest itself exceeds Rs 200,000, then you will not be eligible to get any additional deduction. In the case of let-out property, since there is no such threshold, you can get benefit even if the amount exceeds the limit of Rs 200,000 however, set off against other heads will be limited to Rs 200,000.  If there is any excess loss, you will be eligible to carry forward the loss to next year.
-The benefit of claiming Rs 2 lakhs will be reduced to Rs. 30,000 if the property is not acquired or construction is incomplete within 5 years from the end of the financial year in which the home loan is availed.

Where to Claim Pre-construction Interest in ITR Form?:You can claim the Interest on the housing loan or Pre-construction interest on the housing loan in Schedule HP of your ITR form (ITR 1,2,3,4) under Interest payable on borrowed capital.






Frequently asked Questions:

Q.What is your ‘income from house property’ when you/your family live(s) in it?-If you are using your property for residence throughout the year and it’s not let out or used for any other purpose, it is considered a self-occupied house property. The gross annual value of this property is zero. There is no income from your house property. Note: Since the gross annual value of a self-occupied house is zero, claiming the deduction on home loan interest will result in a loss from house property. This loss can be adjusted against your income from other heads.

Q.A house has been self-occupied for six months and rented out for six months. What is its income?-Calculate the gross annual value of the property by finding out its reasonable rent and actual rent collected.If Actual Rent is lower than Reasonable Rent, only because the house was vacant and not for any other reason, take actual rent collected as Gross Annual Value. If Actual Rent is lower than Reasonable Rent because of other factors (say the tenant and the landlord are related), then take reasonable rent as GAV.

Q.Income received as rent from subletting of house property will be taxed under “Income from House Property”?-No. This is because rental income received by the owner of property alone is taxed as “Income from House Property”. Rental income in the hands of anyone other than the owner shall be taxed under “Other sources”. Therefore, income from subletting will be chargeable under “Other Sources”.

Q.Can a deduction of interest paid against loan taken from friends and relatives be claimed from house property income?-Yes. A deduction under Section 24 for interest paid on loan availed from friends or relatives is also allowed from the Net Annual Value. The law nowhere mandates that the loan should have been taken only from a bank to claim this deduction. But here, one must note that the principal repayment in respect of such a loan will not qualify for a deduction under Section 80C.

Q.I have taken a home loan from a bank for construction of a house in June 2015. The construction of the house is complete in June 2018. I have started paying the EMI for the home loan taken from July 2015. Will I not get any benefit of the home loan repayment made between July 2015 and June 2018 as the construction is complete only in June 2018?-The income tax law allows you to claim pre-construction interest as a deduction from the Net Annual Value, which is nothing but the interest payment on home loan made between the date of borrowing and date of completion of construction. This interest can be claimed in 5 equal instalments beginning the year of completion of construction besides the regular interest claim.

Q.How does the claim of deduction under Section 24 and Section 80C work if a home loan has been availed for 2 houses?-A taxpayer can claim deduction under Section 24 of interest paid on home loan for each of the houses separately. However, the overall loss from house property that can be claimed for a year is restricted to Rs 2 lakhs.As regards 80C deduction, the principal portion of home loan repaid in respect of both houses can be claimed, however within the overall cap of Rs 1.5 lakhs for each financial year.

Q.What is a self occupied property, let out property and deemed let out property?-Self-occupied: Is one where you or your family resides and the question of receiving rental income out of this does not arise
-Let Out: Is one which you have given out on rent. Therefore, the rental income would be considered as your income from house property.
-Deemed Let out: When a taxpayer owns more than two house property, the law mandates that only two (Prior to Budget 2019, it was only one property) such properties can be treated as self-occupied while the third one (irrespective of whether let out or not) will be deemed to be let out.

Q.I have incurred a loss from house property. I have missed the return filing deadline. Will I lose the benefit of carry forward of losses incurred?-One is supposed to file his return within the due date which is 31 July for most of the individual taxpayers. If this is not done, losses if any, would not be allowed to be carried forward to future years for set off. However, losses from house property is an exception to this rule and can be carried forward to future years even if return is not filed on time.

Q.I have paid municipal taxes on my flay pertaining to the year 2017-18 in April 2018. Can I claim deduction of such taxes for FY 2017-18 (AY 2018-19)?-Municipal taxes are always allowed as a deduction only on payment basis. Though you have paid taxes pertaining to FY 2017-18, since the payment has been made in April 2018 i.e. FY 2018-19, it will be allowed for FY 2018-19 only as a deduction from Gross Annual Value.

Q.I am the owner of a shop space which I have given out on rent. How should I offer such income to tax?-If rent has to be charged to tax under “Income from House Property”, the property that has been given on rent must be a building or a land appurtenant thereto. Since the shop falls under the definition of a building, the rental income from such shop must be offered to tax under “House Property only”.

Q.I have transferred my flat in the name of my wife as a gift. She receives monthly rental from this flat. Should she offer this as her income?-Since the flat has been given to your wife as a gift i.e. for nil consideration, you will be considered as the “deemed owner” of the house and the income from renting the flat will be clubbed in your hands and you must offer the same to tax as house property income.

Q.I have received an unrealized rent which were arrears in earlier years. What will the tax treatment for such realisation of arrears of rent ?-Since the unrealised rent was excluded from “Income from house property” in the previous years due to non- realisation, you will have to include this income in the year of receipt of arrears of rent. It is not necessary to be the owner of the property in the year of receipt. You can also deduct 30% of such rent while charging it to income tax.

Q.I own a property which was self-occupied from April 2017 to September 2017 and then was let out from October 2017 to February 2018. How will I compute my Income from house property ?-For the purpose of computing Income from house property, such property will be considered to let-out throughout the year. However, actual rent received will only be considered for let-out period i.e October 2017 to February 2018.

Q.How to compute income from a house property, when part of the property is self-occupied and part is let-out?-If a house property consist of 2 or more units, one of which is self-occupied and the remaining units are let-out then the all the units will be treated as independent units and income from those units will be computed in the following manner:
-Income from unit occupied by the owner will be computed as Self Occupied property income and
-Income from unit let-out by the owner will be treated as let-out property income.

Q.How to claim both HRA and home loan?-HRA exemption (section 10-13a) and deduction for home loan instalment (section 80C) and interest are governed by different sections. And hence employees can claim both of them. House rent allowance is to be claimed either by submitting proofs like rent receipts and rent agreement to the employer before the end of the year. Here it is to be noted that HRA cannot be claimed if you are a joint owner of the property and paying rent to the other owner or employee rents out the employer’s property and pays him the rent. But please note that this situation can be monitored closely by the income tax department and the department may disallow the claims if proper documents or explanations are not available.

Q.What are the conditions for claiming a deduction u/s 80EEA?-The stamp duty value of residential houses shall be up to Rs. 45 lakh,The loan is taken from a financial Institution.,The loan has been sanctioned between 01-04-2019 to 31-03-2020,Assessee is not claiming any deduction under section 80EE.,The assessee owns no residential house property on the date of sanction of the loan.

Q.What documents are required to deduct interest on housing loans?-Certificate from the lending institution,Loan sanction letter,Lease deed & Possession (ownership) certificate and Declaration for ownership & self occupancy.

Q.Can a partnership firm, company or trust claim the benefit of Self-occupied Property?-No. The benefit of exemption of self-occupied property is available only to individuals and HUF. The benefit of self-occupied property is not available to a company, partnership firm, trust or other classes of assesses.

Q.Which ITR form is applicable for the assessee having income from house property?-ITR form 1 is applicable for individuals being a resident (other than ‘not ordinarily resident’) having total income upto Rs.50 lakh, having Income from Salaries, one house property, other sources (Interest, dividend, etc.), and agricultural income upto Rs.5,000.

Q.Is advance Municipal taxes paid allowed as a deduction?-Advance municipal taxes are allowed as a deduction in the year it becomes due and not in the year of payment, as it would not qualify as a tax levied, and liability incurred in the year of payment.

Q.If the tenant bears municipal taxes, is it chargeable to tax under income from house property?-If the tenant bears municipal taxes, it is neither to be added to the actual rent nor to be allowed as a deduction in the hands of the owner of the property.

Q.If an assessee opts for taxation u/s 115BAC (new regime), is interest deduction u/s 24(b) allowed for self-occupied property?-If the assessee opts for taxation u/s 115BAC, deduction u/s 24(b) shall not be allowed for self-occupied property.

Q.Can husband and wife both claim tax benefits on home loan?-Yes, If you have a housing loan where both husband and wife contribute to such housing loan repayment, then both of them can claim a deduction upto Rs 200,000. T

hus in total, up to Rs 400,000 can be claimed as deduction interest. Also, on the principal portion, Rs 150,000 each can be claimed in 80C also. This is a powerful tax planning strategy to claim maximum tax benefits.

Q.Can I claim tax exemption for a property in my wife's name for which I am paying full EMI since I am the deemed owner?-As per Section 27 of the Income Tax Act, Where the entire consideration for the acquisition of such house property is borne by you, then you will be the deemed owner of such property. As such any rental income or interest on the loan, you are eligible to claim the same.However, from a practical implementation point of view, since your name does not appear in the sale deed or in the housing loan document, It might be difficult to substantiate the claim of the deemed ownership. Thus it is recommended to make yourself a co-owner and co-borrower to such property and loan where it will be easy to substantiate the claim. 

Q.I have 2 house properties which are under loan. Can I claim interest benefits on both the property jointly?-Yes , You are eligible to claim exemption u/s 24(b) for both the house property however, such exemption will be limited to Rs 200,000 .

Q.What is the declaration of a joint housing loan?-This is a declaration signed by both the owners of the property mentioning the percentage of housing loan being paid by each of such co owner.

Q.What is the 24(b) deduction for joint owners?-Section 24(b) allows joint owners to claim deduction on interest on housing loan that is being repaid by them.

Q.Is a marriage certificate required for a joint home loan?-Joint Home Loan can be taken by anyone, hence there is requirement of a marriage certificate.

Q.Can I claim 100% tax benefit as co owner?-Yes, if the other co owner does not claim their share of exemption and declaration is provided on the same 100% tax benefit can be claimed by the other co owner.

Q.Can 80EE and 80EEA both be claimed?-Section 80EE and 80EEA is mutually exclusive and cannot be claimed together since applicability of such section falls in different financial year. Section 80EE was applicable for all the home loan sanctioned between 1st April 2016 to 31st Mar 2017. Section 80EEA was applicable for all the home loan sanctioned between 1st April 2019 to 31st Mar 2022.

Q.Is pre-EMI fully taxable?:Income-tax act allows to claim pre-construction interest only after the construction is completed in 5 equal installments. Also, only the interest component can be claimed as deduction on completion of construction.

Q.Difference between pre-EMI and pre-construction?:Pre-EMI Interest is a banking terminology. This is the interest component before the EMI on such a loan has started. Pre-Construction interest is the time period till the preceding financial year in which construction is completed. This is relevant under Income tax act to claim a deduction under Section 24(b). Thus both Pre-EMI and Pre-construction interests are different and cannot be considered one and the same.

Most Important Questions:
Q.What income is charged to income tax under the head 'Income from house property'?
Answer:As per section 22 of the Income Tax Act 1961, the rental income from property consisting of any buildings or lands appurtenant thereto of which the assessee is the owner, shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head "Income from house property". However, income from portions of property occupied for the purposes of assessee’s business or profession, the profits of which are chargeable to income-tax is not taxable under the head "Income from house property".

Q.What is self-occupied property?
Answer:self-occupied property means a property which is occupied by the taxpayer for his residence (and not for commercial purpose). Whereas up to assessment year 2019-20, if any assessee occupied more than one property, only one could be considered as a self-occupied property and the rest had to be considered as let-out or deemed let out. However, w.e.f. Assessment Year 2020-21, a person can claim two properties as self-occupied house properties subject to certain conditions.

Q.How to compute income from self-occupied property?
Answer:Income chargeable to tax under the head “Income from house property” in case of a self-occupied property is computed in following manner:
-Gross annual value
-Less:- Municipal taxes paid during the year
-Net Annual Value (NAV) 
-Less:- Deduction under section 24
➣ Deduction under section 24(a) @ 30% of NAV
➣ Deduction under section 24(b) on account of interest on borrowed capital
-Income from house property 

From the above computation it can be observed that “Income from house property” in the case of a self-occupied property will be either Nil (if there is no interest on housing loan) or negative (i.e., loss) to the extent of interest on housing loan. Deduction in respect of interest on housing loan in case of a self-occupied property cannot exceed Rs.2,00,000 or Rs. 30,000, as the case may be (discussed in Q 8) in the old regime (Impact of new regime is discussed in Q 88). Deduction of municipal taxes paid during the year will not be allowed in case of selfoccupied property.

Q.Can a property not used for residence by the taxpayer be treated as self-occupied property?
Answer:If the following conditions are satisfied, then the property can be treated as self-occupied and the annual value of a property will be "Nil", even though the property is not occupied by the owner throughout the year for his residence:
aThe taxpayer owns the property;
b)Such property cannot actually be occupied by him owing to his employment, business or profession carried on at any other place and he has to reside at that other place in a building not owned by him;
c)The property mentioned in (a) above (or part thereof) is not actually let out at any time during the year;
d)No other benefit is derived from such property.

Q.Can a partnership firm, company or trust claim benefit of Self occupied Property?
Answer:No. The benefit of exemption of self-occupied property is available only to individuals and HUF. The benefit of self-occupied property is not available to a company, partnership firm, trust or other classes of assesses.[CIT V. Hariprasad Bhojnagarwala (2012) 342 ITR 69]

Q.What will be the tax implications if a person occupies more than one property for his residence? Can he treat all the properties as self-occupied (SOP) and claim gross annual value (GAV) as Nil?
Answer:The SOP benefit (i.e., treating property as SOP and claiming GAV as Nil) is available only in respect of one property occupied by the owner for his residence.
However, w.e.f. Assessment 2020-21, a person can claim two properties as self-occupied house properties subject to certain conditions. Thus, from Assessment Year 2020-21 onwards any two
houses can be treated as self-occupied properties subject to fulfilment of specified conditions. 

Q.If any assessee owned three house property which are occupied by him with his family. Is there any tax implication for financial Year 2022-23?
Answer:Yes, as already discussed w.e.f., Assessment Year 2020-21, a person can claim two properties as self-occupied house properties. Thus, any two out of the three house properties (as per assessee’s choice) shall be treated as self-occupied and the remaining property shall be treated as deemed let-out and will be taxed accordingly.

Q.In case of a self-occupied property, how much of interest on housing loan can be claimed as deduction?
Answer:In the case of self-occupied property, deduction under section 24(b) cannot exceed Rs.2,00,000 or Rs. 30,000 (as the case may be) in the old regime.If all the following conditions are satisfied, then the limit in respect of interest on borrowed capital will be Rs.2,00,000:
➣ Capital is borrowed on or after 1-4-1999.
➣ Capital is borrowed for the purpose of acquisition or construction (i.e., not for repair, renewal, reconstruction) of house property.
➣ Acquisition or construction is completed within 5 years from the end of the financial year in which the capital was borrowed.
➣ The person extending the loan certifies that such interest is payable in respect of the amount advanced for acquisition or construction of the house or as re-finance of the principal amount outstanding under an earlier loan taken for acquisition or construction of the property.
If any of the above condition is not satisfied, then the limit of Rs 2,00,000 will be reduced to Rs. 30,000.

Deduction from Assessment Year 2017-18: As per Section 80EEof the Income-tax Act, deduction of up to Rs. 50,000 is allowed to an Individual towards interest on loan taken for acquisition of a residential house property. However, the deduction is allowed subject to certain condition.

Deduction from Assessment Year 2020-21: With an objective to provide an impetus to the ‘Housing for all’ initiative of the Government and to enable the home buyer to have low-cost funds
at his disposal, the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2019 has inserted a new Section 80EEA under the Income-tax Act for those individuals who are not eligible to claim deduction under Section 80EE. An individual can claim deduction up to Rs. 150,000 under Section 80EEA subject to following conditions:
a) Loan should be sanctioned by the financial institution during the period beginning on 01-04-2019 and ending on the 31-03-2022;
b) Stamp duty value of residential house property should not exceed Rs.45 lakhs;
c) The assessee should not own any residential house property on the date of sanction of loan; and
d) The assessee should not be eligible to claim deduction under Section 80EE. Hence, an individual who does not meet the criteria of Section 80EE shall now be eligible to claim deduction under Section 80EEA of up to Rs. 150,000 in addition to deduction under section 24(b).

Q.If the assessee has 2 self-occupied properties, is the limit of Rs.30,000/Rs.2,00,000 available per property, or available for both the properties combined?
Answer:The limit on deduction is available in aggregate, that is, the limit shall be computed to both the houses. The aggregate of interest deduction cannot exceed the limit of Rs.30,000 or Rs.2,00,000 as the case may be.

Q.How to compute income from a property which is self-occupied for part of the year and let out for part of the year?
Answer:At times a property may be let-out for some time during the year and is self-occupied for the remaining period (i.e., let-out as well as self- occupied during the year). As per the provisions of Section 23(3), For the purpose of computation of income chargeable to tax under the head "Income from house property", such a property will be treated as let -out throughout the year and income will be computed accordingly. If a single unit of a property is self-occupied for part of the year and let-out for the remaining part of the year, then the Reasonable Expected Rent (ER) for the whole year shall be taken into consideration for the purpose of determining the GAV. The ER for the whole year shall be compared with the actual rent received/receivable for the period it was let out and whichever is higher is considered as the GAV. However, municipal taxes for the whole year is allowed as deduction, provided it is paid by the owner during the previous year.

11.How to compute income from a property, when part of the property is self-occupied and part is let-out?
Answer:A house property may consist of two or more independent units, one of which is self-occupied and the remaining are used for any other purpose (i.e., let-out or used for own business). Income from such property will be computed in the following manner:
a)Part/unit which is occupied by the taxpayer for his residence throughout the year will be treated as an independent property and income from such a part/unit will be computed in the manner as discussed in case of a self-occupied property.
b)Part/unit which is let out will be treated as an independent property and income from such a part/unit will be computed in the manner as discussed in case of let out property.
c)Property tax paid and interest on loan shall be bifurcated proportionally between the self-occupied unit and let out unit, and income will be computed after giving effect to this.


Q.On what basis should municipal rent, fair rent, standard rent, property tax paid, interest on loan taken, be apportioned between self-occupied unit and let out unit, or between two let-out units?
Answer:Municipal rent, fair rent, standard rent, property tax paid, interest on loan taken should be apportioned either on plinth area, or built-up floor area, or any other reasonable basis.

Q.How to compute annual value of house property held as ‘Stock-in-
trade’?
Answer:As per Section 23(5), house property held as stock-in-trade which has not been let-out during the year shall be ‘Nil’ up to 2 years from the end of previous year in which certificate of completion is obtained from the competent authority. If the property has been let out, then it shall be assessable as such. After the concessional 2 years, normal provisions in relation to house property shall be liable.

Q.How to compute15. Gross annual value of a property which is let- out throughout the year?
Answer:As per Section 23(1), Gross annual value of a property which is let-out throughout the year is determined in the following manner :
Step 1: Compute reasonable expected rent of the property Step 2: Compute actual rent of the property
Step 3: Compute gross annual value (Higher of Step 1 and step 2)

Q.How to compute reasonable expected rent while computing gross annual value of a property which is let-out throughout the year. ?
Answer:Reasonable expected rent will be higher of the following: Municipal value of the property ; or Fair rent of the property . If a property is covered under Rent Control Act, then the reasonable expected rent cannot exceed standard rent .

Q.What is the meaning of Municipal Value?
Answer:For collection of municipal taxes, local authorities make periodic survey of all buildings in their jurisdiction. Such value determined by the municipal authorities in respect of a property, is called as municipal value of the property.

Q.What is the meaning of Fair Rent?
Answer:It is the reasonable expected rent which the property can fetch. It can be determined on the basis of rent fetched by a similar property in the same or similar locality.

Q.What is the meaning of Standard Rent?
Answer:It is the maximum rent which a person can legally recover from his tenant under the Rent Control Act. Standard rent is applicable only in case of properties covered under Rent Control Act.

Q.How to compute the gross annual value in the case of a property which is vacant for some time during the year?
Answer:As per section 23(1)(c), where the property or any part of the property is let out and was vacant during the whole or any part of the previous year and owing to such vacancy the actual rent received or receivable by the owner in respect thereof is less than the reasonable expected rent than the actual rent so received or receivable (as reduced by the vacant allowance) shall be considered to be the Gross Annual Value of the property. If the expected reasonable rent is more than the rent which would have been receivable if there was no vacancy, then expected reasonable rent would be considered to be the Gross Annual Value of the property.

Q.How to compute actual rent while computing gross annual value of a property which is let-out throughout the year?
Answer:ctual rent means the rent for which the property is let out during the year. While computing actual rent, rent pertaining to vacancy period is not to be deducted. However, unrealised rent is to be deducted from actual rent if conditions specified in this regard are satisfied (discussed in Q25).

Q.If the tenant incurs and bears some repair expenses in connection with the house property, will that be added to actual rent?
Answer:If the tenant incurs and bears some repair expenses, the same shall not be allowed as a deduction to the owner, and neither shall it be added to actual rent. That amount shall not be taxable.[Tushar Shantilal Kothari vs. Dy.CIT (I.T.A. No. 1727/Ahd/2010), CIT v. Parbutty Churn Law [1965] 57 ITR 609 (Cal.)]

Q.What is unrealised rent?
Answer:Unrealised rent is the rent of the property which the owner of the property could not recover from the tenant, i.e., rent not paid by the tenant.

Q.When should unrealised rent be deducted from actual rent for the year?
Answer:If following conditions stipulated by Section 23, read with Rule 4 are satisfied, then unrealised rent can be deducted from actual rent of the year:
➣The tenancy is bona fide.
➣The defaulting tenant has vacated the property, or steps have been taken to compel him to vacate the property.
➣The defaulting tenant is not in occupation of any other property of the taxpayer.
➣The taxpayer has taken all steps to recover such amount, including legal proceedings or he satisfies the Assessing Officer that legal proceedings would be useless.

Question:Is there any expenses allowable in case of let-out property while computing income chargeable to tax under the head “Income from house property?
Answer:While computing income chargeable to tax under the head "Income from house property" in the case of a let-out property, only following items can be claimed as deductions from gross annual value. In other words, deduction cannot be claimed for any expenditure incurred by the taxpayer other than following:
•Deduction on account of municipal taxes paid by the taxpayer during the year
•Deduction under section 24(a) @ 30% of Net Annual Value.
•Deduction under section 24(b) on account of interest on capital borrowed for the purpose of purchase, construction, repair, renewal or reconstruction of the property.
Note: Only municipal taxes paid by the owner during the year can be deduced, hence, municipal taxes due but not paid during the year cannot be deducted or taxes borne by the tenant cannot be deducted. But municipal taxes due for previous years, which have been paid in the current year, can be claimed as a deduction by the taxpayer.

Question:In the case of a let-out property, how much interest on housing loan can be claimed as deduction?
Answer:While computing income chargeable to tax under the head "Income from house property" in case of a let-out property, the taxpayer can claim deduction under section 24(b) on account of interest on loan taken for the purpose of purchase, construction, repair, renewal or reconstruction of the property.
In case of a let-out property, there is no limit on the quantum of interest which can be claimed as deduction under section 24(b). However, in case of a self-occupied property, limit is Rs. 2,00,000 or Rs. 30,000, as the case may be.

Q.For what purpose interest on borrowed capital allowed u/s 24(b) While computing income chargeable to tax under the head “Income from house property” in the case of a let-out property?
Answer:Deduction of interest u/s 24(b) is allowed in computing the tax under the head “Income from House Property” where the property has been acquired, constructed, repaired, renewed or reconstructed with borrowed capital.

Q.Can interest paid on loans taken from friends and relatives be claimed as deduction while calculating house property income?
Answer:Yes, if the loan is taken for purchase, construction, repair, renewal or reconstruction of the house. However, if the loan is taken for personal or other purposes, then the interest on such loan cannot be claimed as deduction.

Q.What is the additional requirement of claiming deduction for interest which is allowable u/s 24(b)?
Answer:For interest to be claimable u/s 24(b), in addition to the loan meeting the requirement mentioned in the section (discussed above), a certificate from the person from whom the amount Is borrowed stating the interest accrued must be furnished.

Q.What are the amounts not deductible from income from house property?
Answer:Except for municipal taxes paid, 30% deduction on gross annual value, and interest on housing loan, no other amount can be deductible from income from house property. However, Notwithstanding anything contained in section 24, any interest payable outside India (not being interest on a loan issued for public subscription before the 1st day of April, 1938), on which tax has not been paid or deducted under Chapter XVII-B and in respect of which there is no person in India who may be treated as an agent under section 163 shall not be deducted in computing the income chargeable under the head "Income from house property".

Q.Whether interest on interest (i.e penal interest) is allowed as deduction u/s 24b?
Answer:No, interest on interest is not allowed as deduction u/s 24b for the purpose of computation taxable income from house property.[Akash & Ambar Trust Vs CIT (Cal) 268 ITR 93]
 
Q.Whether interest paid on any fresh loan taken for repayment of any earlier loan which was taken for the purpose of house property is allowed as deduction?
Answer:Yes, where any fresh loan is taken for repayment of earlier loan and earlier loan was taken for the purpose of house property than interest of fresh loan shall be allowed as deduction.DCIT Vs M/s. Patton Developers Pvt. Ltd. (ITAT Kolkata) [I.T.A No. 1043/Kol/2014

Q.When interest u/s 24b is allowed?
Answer:Interest u/s 24b is allowed on due basis. Provided Interest pertaining to pre-construction period is allowed as deduction in five equal annual instalments, commencing from the year in which the house property is acquired or constructed.

Q.What is pre-construction period?
Answer:While computing income chargeable to tax under the head "Income from house property" in case of a let-out property, the taxpayer can claim deduction under section 24(b) on account of interest on loan taken for the purpose of purchase, construction, repair, renewal or reconstruction of the property.
Deduction on account of interest is classified in two forms, viz., interest pertaining to pre-construction period and interest pertaining to post- construction period.
Post-construction period interest is the interest pertaining to the relevant year (i.e., the year for which income is being computed).
Pre-construction period is the period commencing from the date of borrowing of loan and ends on earlier of the following:
•Date of repayment of loan; or
•31st March immediately prior to the date of completion of the construction/acquisition of the property.
Interest pertaining to pre-construction period is allowed as deduction in five equal annual instalments, commencing from the year in which the house property is acquired or constructed.
 
Q.How much total deduction of interest is allowed u/s 24(b)?
Answer:Thus, total deduction available to the taxpayer under section 24(b) on account of interest will be 1/5th of interest pertaining to pre-construction period (if any) + Interest pertaining to post construction period (if any), subject to the limit of Rs. 2,00,000 or Rs. 30,000, as the case may be

Q.Is Interest allowable u/s 24(b) only if the interest has been paid?
Answer: No,Interest is allowable on accrual basis u/s 24(b). Interest will be allowable as a deduction irrespective of whether interest has been paid or not in the current financial year.

Q.If the interest on housing loan is not due, but has been accrued, is the interest allowable?
Answer:As has been stated in the previous question, interest shall be allowable on accrual, and not on due basis or payment basis. Hence, interest accrued, but not due shall still be allowed as a deduction.

Q.If an assessee has availed moratorium on his housing loan, whether interest on such housing loan is allowable u/s 24(b)?
Answer:If as per the terms of moratorium agreed upon by the parties, if interest continues to accrue during moratorium period, such accrued interest is allowable u/s 24(b).
Further, if the assessee has availed Covid-Moratorium announced by the RBI via Notification No. RBI/2019-20/186, then the interest accrued during moratorium is allowable u/s 24(b).

Q.Is brokerage or commission paid for acquiring the loan be eligible as a deduction from income from house property?
Answer:As per circular 28/ 20.08.1969, brokerage or commission paid for acquiring loan would not be allowable as a deduction from income from house property.

Q.Is interest on unpaid purchase price allowable as a deduction u/s 24(b)?
Answer:When the Assessee pays the consideration for house property in instalments, the unpaid purchase price shall be treated as amount borrowed for acquiring/purchasing the property, and any interest paid or payable on the same would be allowable as a deduction u/s 24(b).[Gopi Kishan Purohit vs CIT [2012] 51 SOT]
 
Q.Is rental income from sub-letting chargeable to tax under the head “Income from house property”?
Answer:Rental income in the hands of owner is charged to tax under the head “Income from house property”. Rental income of a person other than the owner cannot be charged to tax under the head “Income from house property”. Hence, rental income received by a tenant from sub-letting cannot be charged to tax under the head “Income from house property”. Such income is taxable under the head “Income from other sources” or under the head “profits and gains from business or profession”, as the case may be.

Q.Whether rental income could be charged to tax in the hands of a person who is not a registered owner of the property?
Answer:Rental income from property is charged to tax under the head "Income from house property” in the hands of the owner of the property. If a person receiving the rent is not the owner of the property, then rental income is not charged to tax under the head "Income from house property" (E.g. Rent received by tenant from sub-letting).
However in the following cases a person may not be the registered owner of the property, but he will be treated as the owner (i.e., deemed owner) of the property and rental income from property will be charged to tax in his hands:
1.If an individual transfers his or her house property to his/her spouse (not being a transfer in connection with an agreement to live apart) or to his/her minor child (not being married daughter) without adequate consideration, then the transferor will be deemed as owner of the property.
2.Holder of impartible estate is deemed as the owner of the property comprised in the estate
3.A member of co-operative society, company or other association of persons to whom a building (or part of it) is allotted or leased under house building scheme of the society, company or association, as the case may be, is treated as deemed owner of the property.
4.A person acquiring property by satisfying the conditions of section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act, will be treated as deemed owner (although he may not be the registered owner). Section 53A of said Act prescribes following conditions:
a.There must be an agreement in writing.
b.The purchase consideration is paid or the purchaser is willing to pay it.
5.Purchaser has taken the possession of the property in pursuance of the agreement.
6.In case of lease of a property for a period exceeding 12 years (whether originally fixed or provision for extension exists), lessee is deemed to be the owner of the property. However, any right by way of lease from month-to-month or for a period not exceeding one year is not covered by this provision.

Q.If the land is owned by a different person, and the building is owned by a different person, in whose hands the income from house property is taxable?
Answer:Income from house property is taxable in the hands of the owner of the property, irrespective of whether he owns the land on which it is situated. Any income earned by the owner of the land would be chargeable to tax under the head ‘income from other sources’, or ‘Income from Profession and Business’ as the case may be.

Q.If 2 or more people own a property and share of each co-owner is ascertainable and definite, how will it be taxed?
Answer:As per Section 26, Share of each owner in the income of the property will be taxed in his individual assessment according to the nature of occupancy. Deductions available for interest, municipal tax paid, standard deduction, shall be applicable to each co-owner.

Q.If 2 or more people own a property and share of each co-owner is not definite, how will it be taxed?
Answer:If share of each co-owner is not definite, the income from house property shall be determined and charged to tax in the capacity of an AOP.

Q.Under which head is the rental income from a shop charged to tax?
Answer:To tax the rental income under the head “Income from house property”,the rented property should be building or land appurtenant thereto. Shopbeing a building, rental income will be charged to tax under the head “Income from house property”.

Q.If partnership firm operates in property owned by partner, is it taxable in the hands of the partner if no consideration is received?
Answer:If the partner has not derived any benefit from the property, it would be deemed to be used for the partner’s own business (as the assessee is a partner in the firm), hence would not be taxable under ‘Income from House Property’.[PM Thomas 181 ITR 256(Ker.)]

Q.Under which head is the rental Income form residential vacant plot is taxable?
Answer:Rental Income from Vacant land is taxable under the head IFOS u/s 56(1).

Q.Under which head the rental income from a vacant land situated in a municipality area is taxable?
Answer:Rental Income from vacant land in a municipality area is taxable under the head IFOS u/s 56(1).

Q.What is composite rent and what is the tax treatment of composite rent when the composite rent pertains to letting of building along with other assets?
Answer:When the rent received by the owner of the property includes rent in respect of building, as well as rent for other assets and/or consideration for provision of other services, the amount so received is called composite rent.
The tax treatment of composite rent when it pertains to letting of building along with other assets is as follows:-
a)In a case where letting out of building and letting out of other assets are inseparable (i.e., both the lettings are composite and not separable, e.g., letting of equipped theatre), entire rent (i.e. composite rent) will be charged to tax under the head “Profits and gains of business and profession” or “Income from other sources”, as the case may be. Nothing is charged to tax under the head “Income from house property”.
 
b)In a case where, letting out of building and letting out of other assets are separable (i.e., both the lettings are separable, e.g., letting out of refrigerator along with residential bungalow), rent of building will be charged to tax under the head “Income from house property” and rent of other assets will be charged to tax under the head “Profits and gains of business and profession” or “Income from other sources”, as the case may be. This rule is applicable, even if the owner receives composite rent for both the lettings. In other words, in such a case, the composite rent is to be allocated for letting out of building and for letting of other assets.

Q.What is the tax treatment of composite rent when the composite rent pertains to letting out of building along with charges for provision of services?
Answer:In a case where composite rent includes rent of building and charges for different services (like lift, watchman, water supply, etc.): In this situation, the composite rent is to be bifurcated and the sum attributable to the use of property will be charged to tax under the head “Income from house property” and charges for various services will be charged to tax under the head “Profits and gains of business and profession” or “Income from other sources” (as the case may be).

Q.What is the tax treatment of arrears of rent?
Answer:The amount received on account of arrears of rent (not charged to tax earlier) will be charged to tax after deducting a sum equal to 30% of such arrears. It is charged to tax under the head ‘Income from House Property’ in the year in which it is received. Such amount is charged to tax whether or not the taxpayer owns the property in the year of receipt.

Q.What is the tax treatment of unrealised rent which is subsequently realised?
Answer:Any subsequent recovery of unrealized rent (not charged to tax earlier) shall be deemed to be the income of taxpayer under the head “Income from house property” in the year in which such rent is realized (whether or not the assessee is the owner of that property in that year). It will be charged to tax if the said rent is not charged on due basis, after deducting a sum equal to 30% of unrealized rent.
 
Q.When is the income from house property exempt?
Answer:Under section 10 of the Income-tax Act 1961 following incomes from house property are exempted from tax. These incomes are not to be included in the total income of assessee. Hence no tax is payable on such incomes. These incomes are : -
a)Income from such house property which is situated on or in the immediate vicinity of agricultural land which is used for agricultural purposes by cultivator is exempted from tax as per section 2(1)(1). Examples of this kind of income include renting or leasing of a farmhouse, storehouse or godown.
b)Income from house property of local authorities is tax-exempted as per Section 10(20).
c)As per section 13A any income of a political party which is chargeable under the head "Income from house property" or "Income from other sources" or "Capital gains" or any income by way of voluntary contributions received by a political party from any person shall not be included in the total income of the previous year of such political party subject to the prescribed conditions
d)Any income earned from a property belonging to an approved scientific research association is exempted from tax under Section 10(21).
e)Property income of Certified trade union is exempted from tax under Section 10(24).
f)The annual value of one palace occupied by an ex-ruler of Indian states is free from tax as per Section 10(19A) where other palaces come under taxation.
g)The annual value of two self-occupied property for own residence is exempted from tax under Section 23(2).
h)Income from property used for one’s own business or profession
is also tax-exempted under Section 22.

Q.What is Gross annual value of the house property used for own business and profession?
Answer:The GAV of the house used for own business or profession is Nil . However, there is no income chargeable to tax under this head from such house property.

Q.In whose case, income from House Property is exempt?
Answer:Income from house property held by the following shall be exempt:
I.House property held by a local authority.
II.House property held by a scientific research institution.
III.House property held at a political party.
IV.House property held by a university and any other educational institution working for spreading education and not to earn profit.
V.House property held by a hospital or medical institution working for the spreading of medical services to people and are not meant for earning profit.
VI.Income from a farmhouse

Q.What is TDS on Rent?
Answer:The Finance Act, 2017 has introduced section 194-IB providing that Tenant of a property making monthly rent payment exceeding ₹ 50, 000 is required to deduct tax at the rate of 5% from the rent payable to a resident landlord (depending upon the Date of Payment/Credit to the Landlord).Section 194I of the income tax covers TDS on rent. It imposes an obligation for TDS deduction on persons (other than individual/HUF) making rental payments to resident Indians above a specified limit, i.e., Rs.2,40,000 in a year. The rent under this section broadly includes house rent, machine rent, building rent, office rent, furniture rent etc.
Section 195 of the Income tax covers a host of areas on which TDS has to be deducted, including TDS on rent when the landlord is a non- resident. The tenant is obligated to deduct TDS u/s 195 when making rental payment (more on this is discussed later).
This sections were introduced to bring rent under the ambit of TDS provisions as rent is a substantial source of income in India, which was escaping the tax net.
 
Q.Who is responsible to deduct the TDS on Rent of Property u/s 194 - IB?
Answer:The tenant of the property being an individual or a HUF (not liable to audit u/s 44AB) would have to deduct the TDS and deposit the same in Government treasury.

Q.Whether tenant require to procure TAN to report the TDS on rent of Property u/s 194IB?
Answer:No, tenant or Payer of the rent on property is not required to procure Tax Deduction Account Number (TAN) to report TDS on rent of Property u/s 194IB. The Tenant is required to quote his or her PAN and PAN of the landlord.

Q.Who is liable to deduct TDS on Rent under Section 194I of Income tax Act, 1961?
Answer:Any person, other than an individual or a HUF, is responsible for paying to resident in India, any income by way of the rent, amounting in aggregate to more than Rs. 2,40,000 in a financial year. However, individuals and HUF who were covered under section 44AB(a) and (b) in the preceding previous year i.e. whose gross turnover/receipts of the business/profession in the immediately preceding financial year exceed Rs. 1,00,00,000/50,00,000, as the case may be, are also required to deduct tax at source if they are paying rent to resident in India amounting in aggregate to more than Rs. 2,40,000 in a financial year.

Q.Under what circumstances there is no need to deduct TDS on rent payable to resident landlord?
Answer:TDS on rent is not required to be deducted in the following circumstances when the landlord is a resident:
•The aggregate amount paid / payable during the Financial Year doesn’t exceed the threshold exemption limit i.e. doesn’t exceed INR 2,40,000.
•The payer / tenant is an individual or HUF who is not liable to tax audit as per section 44 (AB) clause (a) or (b) and the rent payable is not more than Rs. 50,000 per month.
•Rent is paid / payable to a government agency.
•Where the income by way of rent is credited or paid to a business trust, being a real estate investment trust, in respect of any real estate asset, referred to in clause (23FCA) of section 10, owned directly by such business trust
•In case, where payee has applied in Form 13 to AO for non- deduction, being his taxable income including rent below taxable limit, and has obtained certificate thereof.

Q.What is the taxability of advance rent received?
Answer:Advance rent is the rent received for the months on which rent is not yet due. Advance rent is taxable in the year for which such rent accrues, and not in the year in which it is received if both the years are different.

Q.What is the TDS liability on rental payment to non-resident?
Answer:If the landlord is a Non-resident, the tenant is liable to deduct tax under section 195 of the Income-tax Act. The rate applicable in this case will be 30% plus education cess at 4% plus surcharge if applicable (if surcharge is not applicable, the tax rate would be 31.20%). It is important to note here that in case of non-residents there is no minimum amount prescribed for applicability of TDS. TDS has to be deducted irrespective of the quantum of amount. NRI can ask for lower deduction or no deduction certificate from IT authorities, provided his total income in India is below exemption limit. The rent proceeds will have to be credited to NRO account of NRI.
Further, the tenant must fill form 15CA and submit it online. If annual payment of rent is above Rs.5,00,000, then tenant needs to obtain Form 15CB from a Chartered Accountant.

Q.Whether the loss under the head house property can be carry forward if ROI file belatedly?
Answer:Yes, losses computed under the head ‘Income from House property’ can be set off and carry forwarded even if the return of income for the loss year is belatedly filed. There is no limitation as to carry forward of losses under the head ‘Income from House Property’ even if the ROI is filed belatedly.

Q.Whether loss from house property can be set off against income of any other head
Answer:Any loss computed under the head, ‘Income from House property’ can be set off against income under other heads of income subject to a limit (discussed in question 67). Income earned from winnings, and income earned under the head’ Capital Gains’, shall not be eligible for set off against loss from house property.

Q.What is the maximum loss that can be set-off against the income from any other heads.
Answer:As per section 71, The maximum loss from the head ‘Income from house property’ that can be set-off against the income from any other head, except income under the heads ‘capital gains’ and income from winnings, is Rs.2,00,000.

Q.Is carry forward and set off of loss from house property allowed?
Answer:As per section 71B, where for any assessment year the net result of computation under the head "Income from house property" is a loss to the assessee and such loss cannot be or is not wholly set off against income from any other head of income in accordance with the provisions of section 71 ( discussed in question 67) , so much of the loss as has not been so set-off or where he has no income under any other head, the whole loss shall, subject to the provisions of Chapter VI, be carried forward to the following assessment year and—
i.be set off against the income from house property assessable for that assessment year; and
ii.the loss, if any, which has not been set off wholly, the amount of loss not so set off,
shall be carried forwarded up to eight assessment years immediately succeeding the assessment year for which the loss was first computed.

Q.A house property is owned (ownership) by parents. However, elder son has taken housing loan and paying interest and principal of same. Can elder son claim deduction of interest so paid on housing loan u/s 24, even though no ownership document?
Answer:No, the elder son cannot claim the deduction of the interest paid on housing loan u/s 24 since the ownership of the house property is not with the elder son.

Q.What is the Tax treatment of rental income where the purchase consideration for the property is paid by husband and the property is registered in both the husband and wife’s name. Will the income from rent will be charged separately?Or What is the Tax treatment of rental income where house property is transferred to spouse without or inadequate consideration.
Answer:As per section 64(1)(iv) If any individual transfers any asset to his or her spouse without consideration or for inadequate consideration then income from such assets which is received by the spouse is assessable to tax in the hands of the transferor.Provided the above provision is applicable only if relationship of husband and wife should exist at the time of transfer of assets as well as at the time of generating the income.Provided further that the above provision is not applicable if asset is transferred in connection with agreement to live apart.[CIT V.H.L. Gulati [1982] 11 Taxman 167]

Q.Which ITR form is applicable for the assessee having income from house property?
Answer:ITR form 1 is applicable for individuals being a resident (other than ‘not ordinarily resident’) having total income upto Rs.50 lakh, having Income from Salaries, one house property, other sources (Interest, dividend, etc.), and agricultural income upto Rs.5,000.

Q.In which cases ITR form 1 cannot be file by assessee having income from house property?
Answer:As per proviso of rule 12(1)(a) an individual who is a resident other than not ordinarily resident is not eligible to file ITR form 1 having income from the house property in the following cases
i.Where assessee has assets (including financial interest in any entity) located outside India;
ii.has signing authority in any account located outside India;
iii.has income from any source outside India;
iv.has income to be apportioned in accordance with provisions of section 5A;] 
v.has claimed deduction under section 57, other than deduction claimed under clause (iia) thereof;
vi.is a director in any company;
vii.has held any unlisted equity share at any time during the previous year;
viii.is assessable for the whole or any part of the income on which tax has been deducted at source in the hands of a person other than the assessee;]
ix.has claimed any relief of tax under section 90 or 90A or deduction of tax under section 91
x.has agricultural income, exceeding five thousand rupees;]]
xi.has total income, exceeding fifty lakh rupees;
xii.has income taxable under section 115BBDA
xiii.has income of the nature referred to in section 115BBE;]
xiv.is a person in whose case tax has been deducted under section 194N or
xv.is a person in whose case payment or deduction of tax has been deferred under sub-section (2) of section 191 or sub-section (1C) of section 192;

Q.Which ITR form is applicable for assessee having only income from more than one house property?
Answer:ITR form 2 is applicable for the assessee having income from more than one house property and not having Income under the head Profits and Gains of Business or Profession.

Q.If House property is let out outside India, how to calculate income from house property and annual value in India, in the hands of a resident.
Answer:In the hands of a resident, house property which is let out outside India shall be chargeable to tax u/s 22 and the annual value shall be the actual Rental income received. The tax shall be subjected to DTAA between India and the country in which the property is situated, if a DTAA exists with the other country.[CIT Vs R. Venugopal Reddiar [1965] 58 ITR 439]
 
Q.If the house property let out outside India is chargeable to tax in India, using what rate should it be converted to India Rupees?
Answer:As per rule 115, Income accruing or received in foreign currency should be converted into Indian Rupees using the TT Buying rate on the last day of the previous year.

Q.Is deduction on payment of municipal taxes allowable if the municipal taxes have been paid to an authority outside India?
Answer:Deduction on payment of municipal taxes shall be allowable even if the taxes have been paid outside India.

Q.What is the tax treatment of guest houses?
Answer:As guest houses satisfy the definition of house property, they are taxable under the head ‘Income from House Property’ in the hands of the owner/deemed owner of the guest house. However, if the assessee is using the guesthouse for the purpose of his business or profession then income from such property shall not be considered as income from house property.

Q.Can a vacant plot of land not let out during the year be said to be deemed to be let out and taxable under other sources?
Answer:No, IFOS is applicable only when the assessee lets out the land on hire. Therefore, no income shall be offered to tax with respect to a vacant land as deemed to be let out. In fact, there is no deeming section of income tax with respect to income from vacant land not let out.

Q.If an assessee having business of purchase/ sale of immovable property (including earning rental income) is earning rental income, will such a rental income from the property be taxable under the head ‘Income from House Property’ or PGBP?
Answer:Such rental income shall be taxed under the head PGBP since it is one of the main businesses of the assessee and section 22 considers only those incomes which are not charged under PGBP.[Chennai Properties and Investments Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax 373 ITR 673 (SC)]

Q.What is the tax treatment of Income from a property that is situated in India which is taxable in the hands of an NRI?
Answer:A NRI receiving income from a house property which is situated in India, is taxable in India. The income is eligible for all deductions in the same manner as applicable to a resident. An NRI can claim standard deduction of 30%, deduction of property taxes paid in India, benefit from an interest deduction of a home loan. Deduction for stamp duty and registration charges paid on purchasing a property can also be claimed under Section 80C.[CIT Vs R.Venugopal Reddiar [1965] 58 ITR 439]

Q.What is the tax treatment for property not situated in India, in the hands of a non-resident.
Answer:Income from property not situated in India shall not be taxable in India in the hands of a non-resident unless the rent is first received in India. If the rent is first received in India, then the income will be taxable in India.

Q.What are the responsibilities of the Legal Heir with respect to income earned from assets inherited from the deceased?
Answer:Any rental income received after the date of death of owner will be taxable in the hands of the legal heir. The legal heir should include this inherited income while computing their total income. Although there is not tax on inheritance, any income earned from inherited wealth is taxable.

Q.When is deduction of municipal taxes allowed for computation of income under the head ‘Income from House Property’?
Answer:Municipal taxes including service-taxes levied by any local authority in respect of house property is allowed as deduction, if:
a)Taxes are actually borne by the owner (or deemed owner); and
b)Taxes have actually been paid to the relevant authorities during the respective year.
Municipal taxes paid for previous years are also allowed as a deduction in the year of actual payment.

Q.Is advance Municipal taxes paid allowed as a deduction?
Answer:Advance municipal taxes are allowed as a deduction in the year it becomes due and not in the year of payment, as it would not qualify as a tax levied, and liability incurred in the year of payment.
 
Q.Is refund of municipal taxes paid taxable, if it has been allowed as a deduction when computing income from house property?
Answer:Refund of municipal taxes by the local authority shall not be chargeable to tax even if it was allowed as a deduction in computation of income from house property.
India Automobiles Ltd 251 ITR 117 (Cal.)

Q.If municipal taxes are borne by the tenant, is it chargeable to tax under income from house property?
Answer:If Municipal taxes are borne by the tenant, it is neither to be added to the actual rent, nor is it to be allowed as a deduction in the hands of the owner of the property.
Gillanders Arbuthnot & Co.Ltd 142 ITR 598

Q.Deduction for interest on housing loan u/s 80EE
Answer:Deduction of up to Rs 50,000 shall be allowable to an Individual for interest payable on loan taken for the purpose of acquisition of a house property subject to the satisfaction of all the following conditions:
a)Loan has been sanctioned by a ‘Financial Institution’ during the
financial year 2016-17;
b)The amount of loan sanctioned does not exceed Rs 35,00,000;
c)The total value of residential property does not exceed Rs 50,00,000;
d)The assessee does not own any other residential house property on the date of sanction of loan;
Where deduction has been allowed under this section, no deduction shall be allowed in respect of such interest under any other provision.

Q.What is the restriction on set off of loss from House Property
Answer:If the net result of computation of income under the head "Income from House Property" is a loss, then such a loss can be set-off against any other head of income, other than Income under the head Capital Gains. The maximum amount which can be set off is restricted at Rs. 2 Lakh.
However, the loss which couldn't be set off can be carried forward for set-off in subsequent years. It can be carried forward for 8 Assessment years for set-off.
 
Q.If an assessee opts for taxation u/s 115BAC (new regime), is interest deduction u/s 24(b) allowed for self-occupied property?
Answer:If the assessee opts for taxation u/s 115BAC, deduction u/s 24(b) shall not be allowed for self-occupied property.

Q.If an assessee opts for taxation u/s 115BAC (new regime), is deduction for municipal taxes paid and standard deduction (30% of NAV) available?
Answer:Yes, deduction for municipal taxes and standard deduction at 30% of NAV is available with respect to let-out and deemed let-out properties even if the assessee opts for taxation u/s 115BAC (new regime).

Q.If an assessee opts for taxation u/s 115BAC (new regime), is interest deduction u/s 24(b) allowed for let-out property?
Answer:If the assessee opts for taxation u/s 115BAC, deduction u/s 24(b) shall be allowed for let out property.

Q.If the ownership of the property is under dispute before the courts, then how will the property be taxed?
Answer:If the ownership of the property is under dispute, it shall be taxed in the hands of the assessee as decided by the Income Tax authorities until a final judgement is delivered.
Keshardeo Chamaria[ 1937] 5 ITR 246

Q.If there are more than one separate let out properties, should the house property income be calculated separately for each individual property or by clubbing all the rental receipts in one calculation?
Answer:In case there are more than one property which is let out, the individuality of each such unit shall be maintained and not be merged even if it is let out to the same person. Hence, the calculation will have to be made separately for each of the properties.

Q.Husband and Wife jointly own a house property in which both have invested equally from individual and independent sources. Can the rental income received be split between the two to be taxed in individual hands?
Answer:Yes, Rental Income received by each co-owner, husband and wife in this context, shall be taxed proportionately and taxed in the hands of both independently as per their share in the said property.
 
Q.Can the payment of stamp duty for the preparation and registration of lease deed be claimed as a deduction from rent received?
No, payments of stamp duty for the preparation and registration of sale deed cannot be deducted from the rent received.
CIT Vs Premnath Motors (Raj) Pvt Ltd [2007] 163 Taxmann 383 (Raj.)
Answer:In case of self-occupied property, can the assessee get the benefit of standard deduction?
If an assessee has considered/declared a property as a self-occupied property, Gross Annual Value (GAV) of such a property would be NIL. So, the assessee would not be eligible to avail the benefit of standard deduction.
Q.What is maximum amount of deduction of interest in case of jointly owned property?
Answer:Each co-owner can separately claim a deduction of interest on loan to the maximum of Rs.2 lakhs or Rs.30,000 as the case may be. Effectively, the maximum deduction available would get multiplied by the number of such co-owners.

Q.Should non-refundable deposit be included as a part of rent received?
Answer:Any non-refundable deposit received from a tenant, in whatever name it may be called, shall be included in the rent received on pro rata basis.

Q.Should refundable deposit be included as a part of rent received?
Answer:Refundable security received while giving the property on rent shall not be included in the rent received.

Q.Deduction of Interest on Loan payable to Non-resident?
Answer:As per section 25, interest chargeable under the Income tax Act, which is payable outside India on which tax has not been paid or deducted (and in respect of which there is no person in India, who may be treated as an agent under section 163) shall not be deducted in computing the income chargeable under the head “Income from house property”.

Q.Is the rent of tower/antenna installed on terrace chargeable to tax under the head Income from house Property?
Answer:If an assessee who owns terrace floor of a building gives the same on a license to a telecom company for installing tower/antenna, the license fee is taxable as Income from house property[Niagara Hotels & Builders (P.) Ltd vs CIT [2015]]

Q.Is the Annual Value of the clubhouse owned by the club chargeable to tax?
Answer:In case of Property owned by the club, the Annual Value of the Clubhouse is not chargeable to tax because of Principle of Mutuality.[Chelmsford Club Vs CIT [2000] 109 Taxmann 215 (SC)]

Q.In case the owner of property is not able to find a tenant and property remains vacant, can addition on account of notional rent be made or not?
Answer:In case no rent was derived from property then no annual value can be taken for the purpose of calculating income from house property.[Sachin R. Tendulkar, Mumbai vs DCIT 23(3)], Mumbai on 10 August 2018

Q.Can the payment made towards Non- Occupancy and Maintenance Charges be claimed as deduction from rent received?
Answer:Yes, the payment made towards Non- Occupancy and Maintenance Charges be claimed as deduction from rent received.[Sharmila Tagore vs Joint Commissioner of Income Tax] on 14 June, 2004

Q.Is rental income from letting out properties held as stock-in-trade is taxable as income from house property or Income from Business or profession?
Answer:Rental income from letting out properties held as stock-in-trade is taxable as income from house property.[New Delhi Hotels Ltd, 2014 [Delhi]]

Q.Whether interest on House building advance taken by the Central Government servants under House Building Advance Rules can be allowed as deduction under section 24(1)(vi) (due or when it is actually paid)
Answer:Under section 24(1)(vi ) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 where property has been acquired or constructed with borrowed capital, a deduction in respect of amount of interest payable on such capital is allowed in computing the income from house property. Since the word used is ‘payable’, deduction under section 24(1) (vi ) would be on the basis of accrual of interest which would start running from the date of the drawal of the advance. The interest that accrues is to be calculated annually in terms of rule 6 of the House Building Advance Rules on the balances outstanding on the last day of each month.Circular: No. 363 [F. No. 168/4/82-IT(A-I)], dated 24-6-1983.

Q.Whether interest payable on Fresh loan raised to repay original loan taken for constructing/ buying property is admissible as a deduction under clause (vi) of sub-section (1) of section 24
Answer:Interest on second loan taken to repay first loan - Where a fresh loan has been raised to repay the original loan if the second borrowing has really been used merely to repay the original loan and this fact is proved to the satisfaction of the ITO, the interest paid on the second loan would also be allowed as a deduction under section 24(1)(vi)[Circular: No. 28, dated 20-8-1969.]
In case of tenant co-partnership co-operative housing societies - Whether legal ownership in flats can be said to vest in individual members themselves and not in co-operative society
Tenant co-partnership co-operative housing societies - In the case of tenant co-partnership co- operative housing societies, the income from each building should be assessed in the hands of the individual members to whom it had been allotted. For all purposes (including attachment and recovery of tax, etc.) the individual members should be regarded as the legal owners of the property in question - Circular: No. 9, dated 25-3-1969.

Q.Under which head Income from Property received by real estate businessman during the period of ownership is taxable.
Answer:If an assessee carries on business of purchasing and selling buildings, income received from the buildings so long as they are owned by the assessee will be shown under the head 'Income from house property' and not under the head 'Profits and gains of business'[CIT v. Chugandas & Co. [1965] 55 ITR 17 (SC).]
Where assessee-company was formed for purchasing and selling properties, earning of rental income by letting out properties owned by it was chargeable to tax under head 'Income from house property' and not under head 'Profits and gains of business' –CWT v. Atma Ram Properties (P) Ltd. [2017] (Delhi).
	
Question:Whether deduction u/s 24 is separately allowable to each co-owner
Answer:Where each of the co-owners is allocated his share in the income of the joint property, it becomes an income from the house property within the meaning of sections 22 and 23. From that income again each of these owners is entitled to deductions under section 24 individually –[CIT v. Abdullabhai M. Moonim [1981] 132 ITR 642 (Bom.).]

Q.Rental Income – Income from House Property or Business Income?
Answer:Whether rental income from residential property should be assessed under the head "Income from House Property" (HP) or under the head "Profits and Gains from Business or Profession" (PGBP) is a subject of much debate between taxpayers and the Income-tax department. The line of distinction is extremely thin, and the courts have also expressed diverse opinions on facts that appear to be related. It is claimed that no one source of income can be treated as general or specific for the purposes of any of the heads of income under the Act. These heads are mutually exclusive.
However, from various judgement it can concluded that if any property is used as business asset and the exclusive business of the assessees- company or firm is to earn income by way of rental or lease money, then such rental income can be treated only as "business income of the assessee" and not as income from 'house property.

Question:Whether Income from paying guest establishment is charged to Income-tax u/h income form House Property or PGBP?
Answer:Where owner of the property running the paying guest establishment, than Income form Property is assessable under the head of business.
An Individual would always prefer to show rental income as Income from Business. Which allows to deduct all the expenses incurred to maintain the property, claim depreciation and not pay notional rent when the property is not let out.

Question:Taxability of unsold portion of building in case of real estate developer or builder?
Answer:Where any rental income is derived form unsold portion of property constructed by the real estate developer or builder is charged to tax u/h Income from House property.
[Sane & Doshi Enterprises, Mumbai vs Jt Cit 17(3)]

Question:Taxability of income from property given to employees or director for residential purpose?
Answer:Where any property occupied by employees or its director etc. who are concerned with the promotion of the business of the assessee company to enable them to discharge their functions efficiently, with or without payment of rent and the letting out of the property is subservient and incidental to the main business of the assessee, such an occupation amounts to an occupation and user of the property by the assessee itself for the purposes of its business, even though no business is actually carried on in such premises. Income from such property is not assessable as income from house property.[CIT v. Modi Industries Ltd [1994] 73 Taxman 691 (Delhi)(FB)/CIT Vazir Sultan Tobacco Co. Ltd. [1988] 173 ITR 290 (AP).]







































